# 11. 연구논문_Body stakes an existential ethics of care in living with biometrics

---
**Source:** [[11. 연구논문_Body stakes an existential ethics of care in living with biometrics.pdf]]
**Category:** #mba #ai
**Imported:** 2026-03-05

Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01550-8
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Body stakes: an existential ethics of care in living with biometrics 
and AI
Amanda Lagerkvist1   · Matilda Tudor1 · Jacek Smolicki3 · Charles M. Ess2 · Jenny Eriksson Lundström1 · Maria Rogg1
Received: 23 August 2021 / Accepted: 21 March 2022 / Published online: 14 September 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
This article discusses the key existential stakes of implementing biometrics in human lifeworlds. In this pursuit, we offer a 
problematization and reinvention of central values often taken for granted within the “ethical turn” of AI development and 
discourse, such as autonomy, agency, privacy and integrity, as we revisit basic questions about what it means to be human 
and embodied. Within a framework of existential media studies, we introduce an existential ethics of care—through a con-
versation between existentialism, virtue ethics, a feminist ethics of care and post-humanist ethics—aiming to deepen and 
nuance our understanding of the human behind “human-centered” AI directives. The key argument is that biometrics impli-
cates humans through unprecedented forms of objectification, through which the existential body—the relational, intimate 
and frail human being—is at risk. We interrogate these risks as they become visible at three sites where embodied humans 
are challenged by biometrics, and thus where the existential body is challenged by the biometric body. This occurs through 
reductionism (biometric passports nailing bodies to identities, removing human judgment and compromising agency at the 
AI border), enforced transparency (smart home assistants surveying human intimacies and invading intimate spaces in the 
bedroom) and the breaching of bodily integrity (chipping bodies to capture sensory data, challenging the very concept of 
bodily integrity through self-invasive biohacking). Our existential ethics of care is importantly not a solutionist list of prin-
ciples or suggestions, but a manifesto for a way of thinking about the ethical challenges of living with biometrics in today’s 
world, by raising the right questions. We argue that a revitalized discussion of the basic existential stakes within human 
lived experience is needed and should serve as the foundation on which comprehensive frameworks can be built to address 
the complexities and prospects for ethical machines, responsible biometrics and AI.
Keywords  Biometrics · Everyday life · Lifeworld · Bodies · Existential ethics · Ethcis of care
1  Introduction: the right questions 
beyond the ethical turn1
In the American science fiction film I, Robot (dir. Alex Proyas 
2004), the protagonist Del Spooner—an apprehensive and 
guarded homicide detective (starring Will Smith)—is ambiv-
alently situated in a future of humanoid robots, while being 
himself dependent on a robotic prosthesis for his own function-
ing after a trauma. The plot revolves around familiar fantasies 
and concerns as regards robotic agency and how to control 
 *	 Amanda Lagerkvist 
	
amanda.lagerkvist@im.uu.se
	
Matilda Tudor 
	
matilda.tudor@im.uu.se
	
Jacek Smolicki 
	
jacek.smolicki@gmail.com
	
Charles M. Ess 
	
charles.ess@media.uio.no
	
Jenny Eriksson Lundström 
	
jenny.eriksson@im.uu.se
	
Maria Rogg 
	
maria.rogg@im.uu.se
1	
Department of Informatics and Media, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden
2	
Department of Media Studies, University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway
3	
Department of Culture and Society (IKOS), Linköping 
University, Linköping, Sweden
1  This article is part of the research project “BioMe: Existential 
Challenges and Ethical Imperatives of Biometric Artificial Intel-
ligence in Everyday Lifeworlds” headed by Professor Amanda 
Lagerkvist in the Department of Informatics and Media, Uppsala Uni-
versity, and funded by WASP‑HS: https://​wasp-​hs.​org.


170
	
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181
1 3
it and the risks of human over-reliance on potentially raging 
machines.2 All of this is set against horizons of the prospec-
tive humanity, sentience and arguable rights of robots. When 
Dr. Lanning who is a co-founder of the leading corporation in 
this domain, US Robotics (USR), and its principal scientist, 
mysteriously dies after falling out of his office window, he 
leaves behind a message in which he requests that Spooner 
be assigned to the case. The police declare the death a sui-
cide, but Spooner is suspicious and continues to investigate. 
In that pursuit, he activates a program in which the hologram 
of Dr. Lanning is programmed to answer questions. But as 
Spooner discovers there is a caveat which plainly asserts itself 
when Lanning states: “My responses are limited. You must 
ask the right questions.” When the right questions are eventu-
ally raised, nota bene, the program is terminated. In one key 
scene Spooner ultimately ventilates his personal concerns 
about the lack of ethical judgment (or what virtue ethicists call 
phronēsis) in this world of robots, as he tells a USR psycholo-
gist about how he got his robot arm. In the aftermath of the 
car crash, he was saved underwater by a robot (described as a 
‘difference engine’) because he had a 45% chance of survival 
versus a girl named Sarah in another vehicle, aged 12, whose 
chances were 11% and who was left to die. After describing the 
robot’s resolution of the trolley problem in his favor, he says: 
“She was somebody’s baby. 11 percent would have been more 
than enough. A human being would have known that. Robots, 
they’ve got nothing here (gesturing towards his heart)—noth-
ing but lights and clockwork.” The story thus asks important 
ethical questions, as it rehearses a well-known framing within 
which societal and existential values worthy of protection are 
at risk due to the unholy union of commercial forces hitched to 
the Faustian ambitions of insatiable engineering minds, seek-
ing, in non-transparent and potentially deeply unethical ways, 
to achieve complete control over the world via the powers of 
these new acting technologies.
In the contemporary machine age, by contrast, everything 
seems to be “ethics.” Broad debates on the need for ethical 
and responsible AI have been running high with regard to 
risks for (mis)use of technology and personal data, as well as 
for biased algorithms and designs.3 This has spurred a broad 
“ethical turn” involving industry, academia, the public, civil 
society and policy-makers—and has generated numerous 
initiatives, guidelines and lists of principles that display 
similarities in terms of a shared “values canon.” This canon 
combines utilitarianism with Kantian values, such as privacy 
and autonomy, and places stress on keywords such as trans-
parency, justice, fairness, minimizing bias, non-maleficence, 
reducing harm to humans, security, safety, responsibility, 
accountability, beneficence, trust, sustainability and dignity.4 
As many have observed though, these values are seldom 
deliberated at their core, but rather taken for granted. This 
makes ineffectual “ethics washing” an obvious risk, but even 
more problematically—and profoundly—ethics is in fact 
reduced as it emerges as that sought-after right answer that 
solves the issue and ends the problem/program, concluding 
the exchange. Hence, ethical solutions are all we need, and 
there is no time for questions without answers! In a world 
3  In particular, the use of facial recognition technology for vastly 
diverse areas such as improved consumer experiences or efficient sur-
veillance has been under the ethical microscope, identifying a series 
of critical risks, such as real time surveillance, privacy infringements 
by users, unlawful use of private data or data breaches (Harwell and 
Fowler 35). AI “decision-making” systems – whether for determining 
4  This values canon or values monoculture has been identified by 
aline shakti franzke, after reviewing 85 of these initiatives. The val-
ues commonly repeated are further rooted primarily in Kantian deon-
tology – namely, the insistence on protecting basic rights to privacy, 
equal treatment before the law, freedom of expression, and so on, as 
grounded in the insistence on the human being as a rational autonomy 
(Burgess et al. 2018, p. 16; Ess 23, p. 82). So the Ethics Advisory 
Group (EAG) of the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) 
emphasizes the “values of dignity, autonomy, freedom, solidarity, 
equality, democracy and trust” to be foundational to “the European 
project” – where dignity and autonomy are explicitly linked to “the 
Kantian idea that human beings are to be understood as ends in them-
selves and never as a means alone” (ibid). In addition to the GDPR, 
central EU initiatives and documents frame much contemporary dis-
cussion and debate on AI ethics (cf. Floridi et al. 27; Ess 23, p. 82). 
However, as franzke argues, “While privacy is frequently mentioned, 
only a handful of guidelines address de facto privacy breaches and 
the implications of these in the lives of those affected” (e.g., GDPR, 
or Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI, or The Montreal Declaration 
for responsible AI development).
2  The film is adapted from a screenplay originally suggested by Isaac 
Asimov in his 1942 short story Runaround. The story features the 
Three Laws of Robotics: 1) A robot may not injure a human being or, 
through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm. 2) A robot 
must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such 
orders would conflict with the First Law. 3) A robot must protect its 
own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the 
First or Second Laws, Asimov, I Robot, 1950.
credit worthiness or, still more seriously, making judgments as to the 
likelihood of a particular individual committing a crime in so-called 
pre-emptive policing systems (cf. O'Neill 2016; Hildebrandt 2015) 
or of recidivism should a prisoner be granted parole (the COMPAS 
system, Northpointe/equivant.inc), see e.g., Dressel and Farid 18; 
cf. also Lin et al. 50) – have evoked a range of additional concerns 
beyond personal integrity. Contra promises for social, ecological 
and economical gains, the threats to human rights and liberties are 
highlighted due to limited accuracy depending on homogeneous or 
flawed data (World Economic Forum 68 p. 4). Multiple problems 
of bias (e.g., Gelman, Mattson and Simpson 32; Gates 30; Magnet 
54), both in design and the data sets used to train AI systems (O’Neill 
2016; Noble 56; Kosinski and Wang 44; Eubanks 24, Crawford 2021) 
are now well documented. The IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of 
Autonomous and Intelligent Systems (IEEE 41) thus highlights warn-
ings about among other things, discrimination, adverse economic 
impacts, risks to security of critical infrastructure, and possible nega-
tive long-term effects on societal well-being, thus requesting align-
ment with society’s defined values and ethical principles, in both 
legal and technical dimensions.
Footnote 3 (continued)


171
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181	
1 3
where the future itself has been colonized by AI (Zuboff 69; 
Lagerkvist 47), ethics is thus formulated in solutionist mode 
and packaged as actionable principles and tools for assessing 
how these should be implemented. This includes the idea 
that design itself should be ethical, trustworthy and value 
sensitive from the outset. Technology is the prime mover, 
and ethics is the solutionist remedy.
In this situation, we may ask, why should the humani-
ties bother? With their passion for ambivalence, ambiguity, 
paradox, the unsettled, the uncertain, the immeasurable, the 
perverted, the unseen, the hidden, the obscure; with their 
sensibility for secrets, mysteries, imaginations and com-
plexities; with their sensitivities about limits, embodiment, 
mortality, and their endless curiosity about our human and 
also more than human condition, including their critique of 
normativity—clearly they are off target from the very start. 
Or is that precisely why they should bother? For within the 
humanities, raising the ‘right’ or pertinent questions means 
something entirely different; it is in itself an ethical practice 
which we are in deepest need of in the current moment. 
Rather than providing or expecting absolute answers or 
clear-cut ‘solutions,’ asking the right questions about our 
conduct in digital existence (as the AoIR Ethics 3.0 Guide5 
also adamantly stresses) is a core value and virtue to cherish. 
In fact, many of the great traditions in ethics and philoso-
phy—which constitute an essential normative dialog across 
the centuries about ‘the good life’—have both prevailed 
without simple answers and can precisely due to this teach 
us valuable lessons also today. Such a dialog with nuances, 
respect for otherness and patience—in the spirit of what 
Charles M. Ess calls ethical pluralism (Ess 20; 21, 22)—is 
the imperilled core of a democratic society, but also of an 
existentially sustainable one in which we become human 
with technologies.
But what then are the ‘right questions’ to ask in relation 
to ethical AI, at a point in time when everything is defined 
as ethics and when there are so many initiatives already in 
place? What can a humanistic and more specifically existen-
tial approach add to the picture? Apart from sharing in the 
legitimate concerns about risks that should be taken seri-
ously (Häggström 34), a cue for us can be found in the com-
monly held idea expressed by the European Commission 
as well as the High-Level Expert Group on AI in their list 
of principles for ethically aligned AI that all AI produced 
in Europe should be “human-centric.”6 This is key and 
should be lingered upon, because, who is in fact the human 
behind the expression “human-centered AI”? As the above-
mentioned values canon suggests, when taken for granted, 
a particular formation of subjectivity is commonly invoked: 
the famous and famously disavowed ‘liberal humanist sub-
ject’—the autonomous, independent, certain economic man 
who has been critiqued by Foucauldians and feminists for 
decades. What emerges is thus a masculinist, western subject 
whose rights, not least to a detached definition of individual-
ity itself, are in need of protection against incursions from 
machines.
Yet, this is only one highly limited understanding of what 
it means to be human, in neglect of both human relationality, 
embodiment and truthful singularity as responsibility; of our 
conflicted, faulty, and contradictory nature, and of the condi-
tions of deepest uncertainty under which we live today. Such 
contingencies are heightened as humans are thrown into a 
limit situation of both rapid technological transformations 
and interrelated crises (Lagerkvist 45, 47, 48). Hence, if we 
move beyond the above-mentioned version of the liberal 
subject, we must also ask in this moment: what do we need 
to defend if we define humans existentially? To engage such 
questions we need to problematize what we actually mean 
by these commonly agreed upon core values, by returning to 
the existential grounds upon which all ethical considerations 
are built. In doing so, our goal here is to define an ethics 
which identifies not only risks, but also illuminates and takes 
seriously valued human assets to articulate what is at stake 
for humans in all their diversity in the face of these massive 
developments.
One common attempt to move beyond and decenter the 
liberal humanist subject in contemporary debates on ethics 
and advanced technologies posits machines as acting as ethi-
cal agents, situating ethics transversally across human and 
more-than-human domains. Conceived to be located both 
in things, technologies and human subjects, strands of post-
humanist discourse see ethics as distributed across various 
forms of agency (Verbeek 67; Floridi 26; Hayles 36; Dig-
num 17). While this has profoundly challenged the idea of 
“human-centered ethics” in highly productive ways, these 
“cognitive assemblages” as N. Katherine Hayles (36) calls 
them, simultaneously produce new forms of lived experi-
ence. This, we argue, bring humans and their bodies back 
into the loop, in ways that should evoke a renewed interest 
in classic existential concerns. In other words, we will not 
only decenter “the Human,” but we will re-center humans, 
by opening out to a richer and more pluralistic understand-
ing of their traits, needs and qualities. Humans, we argue, 
should be re-conceived in a multivalent sense, as coexisters 
(Lagerkvist 46, 48) who are both differently situated yet 
sharing in the conditions of deep relationality as embodied, 
mortal, vulnerable, technological, bereft, situated and ethi-
cally responsible beings.
5  franzke, aline shakti, Bechmann, Anja, Zimmer, Michael, Ess, 
Charles and the Association of Internet Researchers (2020). Internet 
Research: Ethical Guidelines 3.0. https://​aoir.​org/​repor​ts/​ethic​s3.​pdf.
6  This is articulated in the coordinated plan for AI made in Europe: 
http://​europa.​eu/​rapid/​press-​relea​se_​MEMO-​18-​6690_​en.​htm, 
see 
also https://​ec.​europa.​eu/​futur​ium/​en/​system/​files/​ged/​ai_​hleg_​draft_​
ethics_​guide​lines_​18_​decem​ber.​pdf.


172
	
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181
1 3
More specifically, this article discusses the key existential 
stakes of implementing biometric AI in human lifeworlds 
by also offering a rethinking of issues of autonomy, agency, 
privacy and integrity. It introduces an existential ethics of 
care—through a conversation between existentialism, virtue 
ethics, post-humanist ethics and a feminist ethics of care—
that sides with and never leaves the vulnerable human body, 
while recognizing human diversity and the plurality of lived 
experience of technology. This means accepting the delicate 
challenge of opening up a normative, yet explorative discus-
sion that after post-humanism reinvents rather than abandons 
the inviolable human being while resituating her as embed-
ded in the technological environment, thus advancing the 
emphasis on autonomy to a position of relational autonomy 
(MacKenzie and Stoljar 53). In this vein, and by thus invit-
ing several ethical paradigms seldom in congress into the 
conversation, we offer much needed and carefully elaborated 
re-centered human dimensions of the existential stakes of 
ethical machines and responsible artificial intelligence (AI).
Our key argument is that biometrics implicates humans 
via unprecedented forms of objectification, through which 
the existential body—the relational, intimate and frail 
human being—is put at risk. We will interrogate these stakes 
at three key sites where they are visible and where the exis-
tential body is thus challenged by the biometric body. This 
occurs through reductionism (biometric passports nailing 
bodies to identities and removing human judgment at the 
AI border), enforced transparency (smart home assistants 
surveying human intimacies and invading obscure spaces 
in the bedroom) and the breaching of bodily integrity (chip-
ping bodies to capture sensory data, challenging the very 
concept of bodily integrity through self-invasive biohack-
ing). We will further argue that the nailing of bodies to 
identities through biometrics paradoxically produces a void 
of embodied existence, hollowing out what it means to be 
human for humanity “in charge” of the machines, as well as 
for humanity when exposed to machines. To chisel out our 
existential ethics of care in this moment, we now turn first to 
what we consider to be at stake for humans in the present age 
of biometric artificial intelligence, and then to what must be 
defended by placing emphasis on some of the incontrovert-
ible aspects, and assets, of being human.
2  What is at stake? Biometrics, ethics 
and bodies
Biometrics is technology built to measure life, more specifi-
cally the digital representations of our unique physiologi-
cal data and behavior, such as facial patterns, eye retinas, 
gait, palm geometry and fingerprints, for the purposes of 
efficient identification and authentication (Ajana 4). In the 
realm of securitization, law enforcement and the military, 
biometrics already has a rather long history, reaching back to 
the 1960s when efforts were made to teach computers to see 
and recognize the human face. The automation of identify-
ing human facial expressions was deeply embedded in social 
and ideological contexts and politically and militarily vested 
interests (Gates 30). But biometric AI is today also part of 
our most intimate lives, quantified self-imaginings, embod-
ied perceptions, and our emergent practices of care and of 
law enforcement through mundane uses of smart watches, 
home assistants, health applications and contactless border 
control. Through daily use of information gathering services, 
we leave behind intimate details about our bodies including 
health-related data such as fingerprints, heart rates, facial 
scans and sounds. For example, smart household appli-
ances, so-called digital assistants such as Amazon’s Alexa, 
Google Assistant and Apple’s Siri, do more than passively 
follow their users’ voice commands; through new forms of 
domestic surveillance, corporations record our words and 
interpret our sounds, often for unspecified purposes. The 
sum of our embodied data is further increasingly treated as 
assets for authentication and verification of our “true selves”, 
and police and judiciary systems are developing both face 
and voice (dialect) reading, recognition and analysis in pre-
emptive policing and immigration control.
Biometrics is the latest instantiation of what Amanda 
Lagerkvist has termed “digital thrownness” (45): the sense 
in which we are thrown into precarious media life, through 
the combination of fast technological developments; new 
emergent social norms and habits of digital cultures; the 
elusive and black-boxed workings of powerful and biased 
algorithms; and not least through the harvesting of body data 
within what Shoshana Zuboff calls surveillance capitalism. 
Lagerkvist stresses that the present moment is in fact a digi-
tal limit situation, in which there are massive ethico-political 
stakes for networked humans. By existentializing media, and 
in proposing a framework for existential media studies, she 
suggests that we revisit what it means to be human in the 
present age of techno-cultural saturation. While attending 
to how existential media both ground us in being and throw 
us up into the air (implying intensified uncertainties), the 
approach speaks to our shared embodied vulnerability and 
deep relationality, and thus demands ethical response—a set-
ting of limits (Lagerkvist 48). In alignment with this stress 
on limits, an existential ethics of care starts from and never 
leaves the vulnerable and mortal body—what we coin the 
existential body of “finite and fragile uniqueness” (Cavarero 
cited in Ajana 3, p. 240)—while also stressing both human 
responsibility and accountability (Dignum 17). Hence we 
argue that the ethical challenges raised by these technologies 
ultimately testify to the fact that even in the age of ever-
present machines “ethics is bodies” (Thacker 2004, p. 188 
in Ajana 4, p. 2, italics added).


173
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181	
1 3
What is at stake ethically in biometrically informed life-
worlds, as we have already stressed above, is an all-pervasive 
form of reinforced objectification of the existential body that 
reduces it, forges compulsory transparency vis-à-vis its 
resting places and hideouts, and breaches it in different and 
ethically problematic ways. In our case, objectification must 
however be defined, importantly, beyond disembodied data 
doubles or “data derivatives” (Amoore 7), since the biom-
etric body is not only “pure information.” Instead, following 
Btihaj Ajana, objectification produces recombinant identities 
(3) generated by big data which “indicates the actuality of 
re-individuation, that is to say the terminal point at which 
data recombine into an identity in the ‘concrete’, ‘corporeal’ 
and ‘material’. In this context, never, at any stage, could 
data be considered as ‘purely’ virtual, decorporealised, dis-
embodied or immaterial sense” (Ajana 5, p. 73, cf. Ajana 
3, p. 248). Biometrics, as we will argue, is thus felt in the 
hurting and sensing body, as it is implicated by technologi-
cal intervention.
3  Biometric lifeworlds: three sites
Our argument will be further pursued by moving through 
three particular sites within our contemporary technologi-
cally enforced lifeworld, where we find that something pro-
found is at stake for embodied humans and thus for human-
ity—in all its plurality—in the machine age. We see those 
sites as territories of new, technologically saturated limit 
situations where personal identities are subject to recombi-
nation beyond one’s awareness. These sites illustrate where 
biometrics is now implemented within everyday life, raising 
crucial ethical questions that all center on tensions between 
the existential body and the biometric body. Here, we find 
bodies in aspiring to movement as to be found by the border, 
bodies in rest and intimacy as to be found in the bedroom, 
and bodies of technological self-invasion incarnated by the 
biohacker.
The sites, spanning both personal and administrative 
scales, are constellations of practices, decisions, spaces, ide-
ologies and technologies, joined and separated by the medi-
ating body, but there are also existential values to be found 
at these sites. Therein, we will further illustrate the pressing 
existential stakes and ethical concerns of these technological 
interventions for both the prospects of achieving a sense of 
what virtue ethicists call well-being and flourishing, and of 
living well together, but also of the inherent threats to these 
values. By consequence, we also revisit and ‘existentialize’ 
issues of autonomy, agency, privacy and integrity. Sensing 
our way across these sites, and making sense of them, by 
adding different feminist, virtue ethicist and post-humanist 
acumens to the concoction, we finally arrive at a conclud-
ing discussion on care ethics through which the tangs and 
traits of our existential ethics of care are intuited and can 
be articulated. En route to getting there, we offer in the fol-
lowing three imaginative and perhaps provocative scenarios 
that will serve to flesh out questions, intentionally left unan-
swered, about how existential needs can be respected in the 
age of biometrics, so as to also set limits for the panvasive 
technological architecture of datafication of our time (Zuboff 
69). We thus begin by the datafied border.
3.1  The border: reducing human identity to body 
features and removing human judgment
Imagine yourself standing as an immigration control officer 
at an airport checkpoint with the long line of travelers in 
front of you. Your gaze is moving between their warm tired 
bodies that all look a bit ragged after the long flight, and 
the screen where their bodily features and accompanying 
identities are presented one after the other. In the queue, you 
see business travelers with important faces and well-tailored 
suits, as well as tourists and those who are probably here 
to visit their family considering the size of their luggage. 
Some kids are screaming, holding on to a woman’s skirt, 
and pearls of sweat are running down from her hijab as she 
tries to calm them down with her one hand while pressing a 
sleeping baby toward her chest with the other. On the screen, 
faces flicker by as the system runs them through, magically 
revealing their personal data. You think about what to eat. 
You think about getting home and finally getting some sleep 
after the long night shift, when the system suddenly raises 
a warning. It is the woman with all the children facing the 
camera. She tries to catch your eyes while the children keep 
on screaming in the background. “Sir, do you want to see 
my passport? Is there something wrong sir?” But you stay 
focused on the screen, trying to understand why the system 
cannot access her records. You look at her passport and the 
documents she handed you, going through her information 
including citizenship, traveling history, criminal record, fam-
ily and associates. Nothing seems quite out of the ordinary. 
You are tired and you think about your bed. “Can you please 
take a step back and then face the camera once more?” She 
immediately follows your command, but the system once 
again fails to access her records. The baby wakes up and 
starts moaning. She looks at you in despair while you call 
for the security officers to come. You know that she will 
come out of the interrogation room in an hour or so and be 
allowed to cross the border. You have seen this before. But 
what can you do? The screen says what it does and your shift 
is about to end.
The contactless border control is here defined as the use 
of biometric data-driven, (semi-) automated technologies 
for the authentication, control and verification of traveler 


174
	
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181
1 3
identities or lie detection.7 Based on these systems, contact-
less border control is being devised and implemented into 
the lifeworld of individuals, travelers and border officials, 
throughout the globe. Cumbersome and inexact, the algo-
rithms designed for goal optimization of the border con-
trol face the moral uncertainty of the “real world”, situa-
tions for which no clear-cut ethical solution exists. Despite 
recent advances, contemporary artificial systems are in fact 
insufficient to be pre-programmed for future decisions that 
simultaneously invoke independent or multi-dimensional 
ethical judgments (Eckersley 19; Cantwell Smith 12; Zweig 
70). Chouliaraki and Georgiou (13) theorize the border as a 
socio-material assemblage with ramifications on many legal 
and political levels pertaining to nations and institutions, but 
also existentially to personhood and identity of self. With 
this backdrop, contactless border controls invoke a set of 
ethical debates that center on the increasing solidification of 
connections between the body and identity, technology and 
biology (Ajana 4, p. 88f). Via algorithms, the biometrical 
data of the body anchors a person’s identity and the indi-
vidual is thrown into the role as mediator, while becom-
ing itself the point of separation. But in a stroke, body and 
identity are separated in case of a failure or shortcoming of 
the technology. In other words: Who are you when the con-
nection to the biometric databases fail? As the databases and 
systems increasingly transcend national and state borders, 
the accountability of data is weakened and dispersed, while 
its recognized flaws and biases that often target marginalized 
groups (Eubanks 24) continue to reinforce bias of race and 
gender (Browne 11). What institution can validate identity, 
when the body itself fails to do so?
The seeming disappearance of borders (Amoore 6) as 
we know them further entails the emergence of new kinds 
of borders even if they are imperceptible to our human 
sensorium. Disappearance of a human-operated border 
control infrastructure entails the emergence of not only 
computing infrastructure, network devices and software, 
but also of  altered human relations and orientations in 
time and space. Taking the existential body as the point 
of departure invokes a wholly different form of autonomy 
indebted to our deep relationality, since it reminds us of 
the ways in which human responsibility and accountability 
are reliant upon our inherent openness to one another. Eth-
ics then, following Levinas (49 [1979]), is a potential for 
truly facing the other, since the face signifies an order of 
responsibility—a moral obligation. The face, now reduced 
to standardized points of measurement, is in fact what can-
not be controlled and constitutes the very exteriority of the 
other which makes her stand out in the world of objects. 
In that sense, the biometric border deprives us of the rela-
tionality of being which is constituted as Merleau-Ponty 
argues by this bodily reciprocity which opens us out to 
one another, and thereby situates “the other as an essen-
tial structure of being human” (Merleau-Ponty 55, 483). 
Hence, our deep relationality as existential beings—our 
self-constitution through others in communication (Jaspers 
42/1970, 64)—is compromised by biometric passports, and 
other forms of automated decision making. Hence, this co-
existential form of selfhood has nothing to do with the 
construction of an identity via the comparison to a datafied 
double that is created in relation to vast databases on thou-
sands of others. By their instrumental de-humanized con-
trol mechanisms these machines furthermore contribute to 
increasingly distancing us from the active negotiation that 
relationality calls upon us. In biometric and algorithmic 
cultures, relationality—one’s potential and need to estab-
lish relations—is pre-programmed, imposed and stifled. In 
a complex and messy world where we are constantly striv-
ing for greater efficiency, borders are losing touch with 
human reflective judgment while the flows of bodies across 
distances are increasingly talked about in terms of faceless 
volumes. This touches right at the heart of Shannon Val-
lors’s 12 techno-moral virtues where human phronēsis is 
center stage, i.e., the “practical wisdom” that should be the 
central capacity for judging an ethically informed response 
within specific concrete, fine-grained circumstances that 
are otherwise intractable for more deterministic, “rule-
book” approaches such as deontology and utilitarianism.8 
In a move resonant with this emphasis, Mark Coeckelbergh 
also recently advances this approach in interesting ways, 
beyond individual agency, by integrating relationality, 
embodiment and practice into the very definition of virtues 
vis-à-vis AI ethics (15, 16).
8  However, it needs to be stressed that opening up the contactless 
borders for existential intervention does not in any way imply a naïve 
nostalgia for borders guarded by human judgment. Instead it urges us 
to reflect critically on the practices of bordering (Keshavarz 43) at 
large as always and already techniques of determining, shaping, and 
even disabling coexistence. However, contactless borders on the other 
hand, certainly do not in any simple way advance ethical and political 
concerns ingrained in these practices.
7  As Pfeifer (61) has comprehensively discussed, in the EU, eu-LIsA 
agency manages several large-scale IT systems such as the Schengen 
Information System (SISII), the Visa information System (VIS), the 
Entry/Exit System and the European travel information authoriza-
tion system (ETIAS) and the European Criminal Records Information 
System—Third-Country Nationals (ECRIS-TCN), all for the purpose 
to improve access to information stored in the information systems 
and identity management at the EU level (European Union Agency 
for the Operational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems in the 
Area of Freedom, Security and Justice, 2021). In the US the Inte-
grated Case Management (ICM) provides us with another example 
of integrated biometric databases built for facilitating border control 
(U.S. Department of Homeland Security 2016).


175
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181	
1 3
Seeing the border as an ethically charged zone of coex-
istence urgently calling for negotiation, what automated 
decision-making seems to do, is to evacuate human respon-
sibility and potentially also autonomy and agency. Even if 
commonly flawed and biased, at the very least, the existence 
of the border guard as an embodied subject in charge, did 
promise a possibility to enter a zone of dialog (or even a dia-
logical confrontation) as opposed to a zone of passive, pre-
emptively non-negotiable verification of one’s status, based 
on a reduced set of body features. The right questions to ask 
then seem to be: what are the prospects for human dignity 
and respectful coexistence in a world where we are habituat-
ing such an instrumental gaze at the other, and where com-
plicated and imperfect decisions-making processes are left 
to machines? What will be the fate of human autonomy and 
judgment as gut feeling in decision making, when identity, 
rights and responsibilities are solely based on a reduced set 
of body features rendered as data?
3.2  The bedroom: the transparent body 
and the perversion and plainness of everyday 
living
Imagine yourself returning home after an exhausting day at 
work. After dinner and chores, you and your partner enter 
the bedroom which comes about as a warm, soft cave in the 
evening dusk; a uterus made of down for you to withdraw 
and rest your weary head and bodies. You lie down on top 
of the bed, facing each other and begin a conversation about 
goings-on at work. You have dimmed your lights and set 
your phone on silent. You feel increasingly detached from 
the external world and more present here and now. As you 
ask your smart home assistant to put on some background 
music, the device fulfills your wish in a matter of an instance. 
Your wish is its command. Yet, as you turn to your partner 
to ask a question, the machine suddenly responds in your 
partner’s place. This throws you out of joint. The device's 
instant readiness reminds you that it is passively listening to 
your conversation, and of course everything else that goes on 
in the bedroom. You think of how desensitized your alert-
ness has become to this presence of an alien element in your 
most intimate space. Who is actually commanding whom in 
this relationship? There and then, the devices that surround 
you, to make you feel independent and calm, make you feel 
uneasy. That night you fail to fall asleep. A few days later, 
you start receiving targeted advertisements about insomnia 
treatment in your social media feed.
As smart home assistants are quickly becoming the fastest 
growing device category around the globe, we are predicted 
to face a new human–machine paradigm dominated by voice 
interaction rather than text in- and output. In 2018 alone, 
100 million Alexa devices were sold globally.9 According 
to Ovum, in 2021 there might be almost as many voice-acti-
vated smart assistants on the planet as people.10 As organ-
izing infrastructure for our ever-smarter living spaces, the 
home assistants raise issues about corporate invasion creep-
ing deeper and deeper into our personal lives. How can the 
existential body be safeguarded in this situation? Here, we 
thus use the site of the bedroom in order to highlight issues 
associated with intimate personhood. First, the bedroom is 
indicative of that which we usually think about as our most 
“private” lives commonly connected (but in no ways lim-
ited) to the sphere of the home. In Shoshana Zuboff’s (69) 
analysis of the datafication of human experience for corpo-
rate interests, she describes the endless surge for new raw 
material for the production of ever more precise prediction 
products. This process is driven by an increasing awareness 
of the value of behavioral surplus and propels a develop-
ment where artifacts and services pose as one thing, such 
as a smart assistant, a baby watcher, a thermostat and so on, 
but are in fact primarily targeting the peripheral surplus: our 
temperament, habits, social relations, background noise, etc. 
Importantly, this is being done to a very high extent with-
out people being consciously aware of being under constant 
surveillance within their private homes, while they are con-
versing over dinner, arguing with their partner, speaking to 
themselves, singing in the shower, making love. While we 
are being taught by imperatives on transparency that we have 
nothing to fear if we have nothing to hide (such as spelled 
out by Google’s former CEO Eric Schmidt), we mean that 
fundamental aspects of being human are forgotten.
The bedroom perhaps more than any other space high-
lights the essential need and right to be able to retreat to 
spaces for rest, pleasure and unproductivity, spaces to let 
down our guard. Ultimately, this may be symbolized by the 
immense vulnerability of the sleeping body in all its inatten-
tive trustfulness. At the same time, the bedroom must not be 
conflated with “the home” in any simplistic, literal sense but 
implies a sense of privacy that often bleeds between loca-
tions, in which existential security can both be lost and had. 
From queer communities, we can learn that such personal 
spheres can be constituted by an intermingling of what is tra-
ditionally understood as private, public, pleasure and politics 
(e.g., Berlant and Warner 10). Nowadays for example, same-
sex dating applications are often considered highly intimate 
spaces among non-heterosexual communities, and the 2018 
scandal where the predominantly gay male app Grindr sold 
highly sensitive information, for example about their users’ 
HIV status, to third parties, provides an illustrative example 
9  https://​polic​yadvi​ce.​net/​insur​ance/​insig​hts/​amazon-​alexa-​stati​stics/.
10  https://​www.​theat​lantic.​com/​magaz​ine/​archi​ve/​2018/​11/​alexa-​how-​
will-​you-​change-​us/​570844/.


176
	
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181
1 3
of how such intimate information can be exploited. This 
means that demands on privacy protection must take its 
starting points from an understanding of a multi-facetted 
and multi-sited human being rather than from specific des-
ignated spaces such as the ‘family home’ where particular 
individuals are envisioned to be located.11 It could be argued 
that the bedroom presents us with the perversion of every-
day living, as a necessary aspect of existence and a take on 
privacy that goes beyond the liberal subject and his need for 
autonomy. Such privacy, we importantly argue, includes the 
right to opacity for that overflow of human activity which 
transgresses, is inconsistent, dishonourable and thus needs 
to escape the terror of transparency and accountability. 
Human beings should have the right to not only privacy in 
any libertarian sense, but to secrecy, dubiousness, and hid-
den closets—intimate spheres of our own where we may trial 
and error and let down our guard, often connected to bodily 
pleasures and needs. We also have the right to be plain and 
invisible in laying claims to nothing. This is not the same 
as saying that these values should be kept away from the 
public, but that they should be regarded as highly vulnerable 
assets of the singular human being, signalling limits for the 
data gathering industry. As such, the bedroom highlights 
that intimacy must be based on consensual relations and 
reminding of the demands from feminist data ethics (Cifor 
et al. 14), of committing to a type of data regime that knits 
the “no” into its fabric. Further, it is important to remember 
that surveillance works in discursive ways, fostering disci-
pline on behalf of the body subject (Foucault, 1977). So if 
it is true as the psychoanalytical tradition would tell us, that 
our lives contain both conscious, secret and unconscious 
dimensions, the right existential question to ask is perhaps: 
what happens to us when all these dimensions are treated as 
equally available for data extraction and objectification? As 
we are constantly thrown back at ourselves by algorithmic 
reflection, will the subject become ever more transparent 
to herself, illuminated into every dark corner? Then, will 
the disciplining terror of complete transparency haunt every 
single bit of human life?
As we have now covered biometric objectification of the 
relational other, of selves in charge via machines at the air-
port, and of the existential body in the bedroom, we will at 
the last site turn to the objectification of the organic body 
by biohackers.
3.3  The biohacker: the breached body 
and the ephemerality of subjectivity
Imagine yourself having been invited to an event by a friend 
who is a self-proclaimed biohacker. It is a Friday night after-
work mingle at a central address in the city, and no costs 
have been spared. You and your friend have just had a vivid 
discussion about what on earth makes her voluntarily trans-
plant digital gadgets into her body and she has explained 
that to her, being in full charge even of the risks, is a jour-
ney of (self-)discovery. You are already on your second 
glass of champagne when a young, handsome man asks for 
everyone’s attention and presents himself as the company 
leader and initiator of the local microchipping movement. 
Your friend seems excited and the atmosphere is vibrating 
as the man exclaims that you who are there tonight are at 
the very forefront of a revolution. You are already ahead of 
the future; a future where the boundaries between man and 
machine will no longer be meaningful, as we have reached 
the end of evolution. Humans have no natural enemies left. 
Everything that follows from now on is artificial. Denying 
it means nothing but stagnation. Your friend has told you 
earlier that before the night is over, every visitor will be 
offered to have a microchip implanted in their arm that will 
enable seamless purchases and identification. Before coming 
here you felt fairly skeptical about the whole idea, but now 
being here with the enthusiastic crowd and the inspirational 
talk, you find it difficult to remember what your skepticism 
was about. So when the line to the chipping booths starts 
to fill up you join your friend. A few weeks later, you have 
already become accustomed to scanning your wrist as pay-
ment method when the morning news reports about a big 
privacy breach scandal. Apparently, a local tech company 
has implanted microchips with unspecified software which 
has been used to extract data to be sold for third parties con-
nected to the right-wing Populist Party on the rise.
In a culture replete with measurement and ubiquitous net-
works, humans have turned to self-quantification and self-
invasion practices, as a means for both utility and social 
and individual transformation (Lupton 2017; Ajana 2018; 
Fors et al. 28). By exploring the continuous becoming of the 
human body as a techno-cultural practice, the community 
of body hackers go further by deconstructing the idea of an 
unchanging core of personhood. As an active negotiation 
between technology and biology, new and fluid subjectivities 
emerge whose amplified irises, sensor-armed fingertips or 
wrinkle freed skin (Hines 39; House 40) expose biometrics’ 
banal defect: the failure to read other bodies, bodies outside 
the norm. Identifying them would require humane hall-
marks—situational, empathetic, and imaginative qualities 
11  Helen Nissenbaum (2010) similarly offers the concept of “contex-
tual integrity” for this type of specification in her famous redefinition 
of privacy away from specified bits/kinds of information to informa-
tion that is shared within specific relationships and webs of relation-
ships. H. Nissenbaum, Privacy in Context: Technology, Policy, and 
the Integrity of Social Life. Stanford Univeristy Press: Palo Alto, CA 
2010. For discussion, see Zimmer (2018). Michael Zimmer (2018) 
Addressing Conceptual Gaps in Big Data Research Ethics: An Appli-
cation of Contextual Integrity. Social Media + Society, April-June 
2018: 1–11. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​20563​05118​7683.


177
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181	
1 3
that our machines lack. Yet, from an existential point of 
view, it is here, in the fluid domain of selfhood, where “the 
ethical plane unfolds” (Ajana 4, p. 87). Since learning to 
become human with machines informs our ethical agency in 
and around them, biohacking may constitute both guidance 
and risk for an existentialist ethics of care.
Today, biometrics govern “the body as a constant entity 
that can be compared to other entities outside time vari-
ants” (Ajana 4, p. 86). Treated as a fixed substance, the body 
gets boxed and organized according to its attributes (sex, 
age, class and skin tone), aiming to establish a 1:1 corre-
spondence between the individual and data abstractions of 
her live body. That way biometric identification installs a 
reidentification of the same (Gallagher 2017, p. 31). The 
fixed body and its description are the object, mechanism 
but also as biohackers expose, the blindside of biometric 
life and identity politics. At the same time, we need to ask: 
is the act to chip oneself only an act of transgression and 
rebellion? Or is the potential ethical problem in fact located 
on a different level? Ajana holds that “the function creep 
of biometric identity systems can be addressed in light of 
their spillover from exceptional spaces […] to the general 
body of humanity in terms of their becoming a normative 
and all-encompassing practice” (4, p. 6). Perhaps then, in 
the end, the biggest ethical concern pertains to such ques-
tions about new enforced normativities—the chipped body 
as the new normal?—and new ensuing vulnerabilities. In 
other words, an existential ethics of care needs to take into 
account that the way we compose our lives with technolo-
gies today—that is our current forms of engagements with 
technologies (along with the attempts to reconfigure their 
dynamics)—are not only determined by factors, processes, 
biases and inequalities of the past (e.g., Benjamin 9) but 
will have a ripple effect in the future. Rethinking the ethics 
of technology in this light might help us better understand, 
inspect and tangibly identify our entwinement in complex, 
often problematic relationships that span histories, places 
and agencies. To date, self-invasive biohacking practices are 
foremost phenomena occurring among elites of tech-savvy, 
intellectual and/or artistic groups where the hacking of bod-
ies is largely done in the name of both individual autonomy 
and within a more progressive narrative, with the aims to 
provide protection against racism, sexism, and ableism, that 
is, protection of marginalized groups. It is however not far-
fetched to imagine that if the use of technological artifacts 
inside the human body would move from the exceptional 
domain of art experiments and life-saving surgery (e.g., 
pacemakers) to the mundane area of consumer practices and 
policy monitoring, those who are most likely to be targeted 
are less advantaged groups. Already today there is numerous 
evidence of the ways in which the previously unexploited 
resource of personal and physiological body data cap-
tured by biometric AI are currently feeding into systems of 
oppression and injustice, disproportionately targeting racial-
ized poor and queer minorities (cf. Eubanks 24; Benjamin, 
9). It is perhaps not very hard to imagine that people seeking 
asylum in Europe—who already have had to find themselves 
in a situation where their body data is captured and stored 
in enormous data bases as resources to restrict and control 
their movement across the continent—would need to accept 
a microchip in exchange for entrance. Marginalized groups 
would in a similar manner be the most vulnerable to a con-
sumer culture where participation becomes conditioned on 
allowing surveillance capitalism even closer onto/into our 
bodies. As smoother payment practices, VR experiences and 
well-tailored dating services will be promised, all that is 
needed is constant access to your heart beat, bloodstreams 
and optic nerve. The right question is perhaps: should the 
body—here breached by listening, counting and calculat-
ing gadgets—in fact, as Lagerkvist has argued in her media 
theory of limits and limit situations (48)—in itself constitute 
an absolute limit against these phenomena? In aiming for an 
existential ethics of care, the right question to ask in terms 
of this site might also be to what extent technological solu-
tionism is building us into systems made for a sunny day? 
That is, systems based on the prerequisite of democratic, 
friendly forces endlessly aiming to enhance our lives. This 
is of course already today very far from reality, and variously 
so, depending on where you happen to live on the planet. But 
we believe that we are yet to see what kinds of all-out abuse 
that could emerge through the implementation of these mass 
surveillance systems in our imperfect, fragile world.
3.4  Summing up the sites and inviting care
Biometrics, as we have shown in this section, challenges 
the existential body through heightened and unprecedented 
forms of objectification of the body, in the shape of biom-
etric bodies of datafication that always remain material and 
concrete. At the border it is challenged by the reductionist 
body, which through biometric passports and contact less 
border controls enable some to project themselves in space 
and time, while others are deemed as risk subjects without 
movement. As we have argued, this form of objectification 
as reduction also implies a severing of the identified individ-
ual from both the singular person, and the existential body 
from her relational being. As previously stated, the unique 
historical person—the existential body—always in becom-
ing as Kierkegaard classically argued in The Sickness unto 
Death—is now in risk of being redacted into mere param-
eterized snapshots of personhood, based on not only fixed 
datafications of the individual itself, but the fixed datafi-
cation of thousands of others, equally reduced (Lury and 
Day 52). This nailing of bodies to quantified, objectified 
identities, produces paradoxically an evacuation of the full-
ness of the existential body, hollowing out what it means 


178
	
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181
1 3
to be human. In fact, an equally problematic reduction and 
sequestration also occurs, as we discussed above, as officers 
at the border are bound to the machine, and have to down-
play their own judgment, and deafen themselves to any nar-
ratives that the traveler wishes to communicate.12 In other 
words, the situation diminishes and subdues our inherent 
relational autonomy.
As we saw in the bedroom, the existential body was fur-
ther threatened by the prospects of the transparent body, 
which is a biometrically forged body without secrets and 
whose existential needs for obscurity, alterity, queerness but 
also sleep and rest are invaded by the surveillance technolo-
gies of smart home assistants. Finally, in the biohacker we 
found a breached body, where bodily integrity itself was 
further called into question, by the self-invasive practices 
of chipping. The existential body in both irreducibility, 
secrecy and within limits, is challenged through this ephem-
eral recombinant identity, an externalized self in becoming, 
re-affirmed through numbers and self-quantification and 
always transparently available and never at peace in non-
accountable obscurity.
All of this leads us to conclude that care must be built in as 
a core principle for biometric AI development. Care, drawing 
on landmark works in feminist ethics of care, implies an ethics 
that is less depending on abstract principles and more on the 
ability to put oneself in the shoes of the other (Noddings 57; 
Ruddick 63; Held 37). While androcentric ethics would put the 
autonomous individual at the center, a feminist ethics of care 
characteristically starts from a human being radically depend-
ent on others and its environment. Closely resembling virtue 
ethics, care can be seen as an ethical core principle (among 
others) for a responsible human coexistence in face of shared 
vulnerability (c.f. Held 37; Tronto 64), but also with a plural-
ist consciousness that reflexively starts from those most likely 
to be exposed in any given situation. This form of ethics of 
care is in close alignment with the goals of existential media 
studies and its practices of slowing down in careful attendance 
(Lagerkvist 48). As Fisher and Tronto emphasize in their classic 
definition of care:
[W]e suggest that caring be viewed a species activ-
ity that includes everything that we do to maintain, 
continue, and repair our “world” so that we can live 
in it as well as possible. That world includes our bod-
ies, our selves, and our environment, all of which we 
seek to interweave in a complex, life-sustaining web 
(Tronto 64, 103).
Building on such discussions, our existential ethics of 
care also wishes to expand on the traditional understanding 
of the existential as inclusive of, but also beyond the sin-
gularity of the human body, to emphasize first in line with 
Jaspers’ philosophy, the intersubjective dimension and then 
also intergenerational entanglements with history and the 
future (as already suggested above), and the responsibilities 
also before other than human realms (Puig de la Bellacasa 
62). Hence, we also aim to broaden the existential purview 
by inviting crucial strands of post-humanist ethics into our 
project (Zylinska 71). If historically, ethical considerations 
used to pertain to the human condition alone (with a pri-
ority given to the condition of a white, western European 
man), today they need to encompass agencies and realms 
that stretch far beyond that perspective. Diverse forms of 
coexistence that we individuals and societies compose with 
technologies are becoming ever more integrally invested in 
multiple other realms “out there” of both human and more 
than human nature. Moreover, those multiple other realms 
have their extensions in time. This move might help us better 
understand, inspect and more tangibly identify our entwine-
ment in complex and often problematic relationships that 
span history, places and agencies. What this means is that 
we urgently need to recalibrate our ethical incentives and 
sensitivities so they encompass perspectives on, on the one 
hand, certain yet often unacknowledged past(s) and, on the 
other, uncertain future(s). We need to learn how to ethically 
navigate—conceptually and practically, philosophically 
and creatively—through those realms and temporalities.13 
A trivial or enforced decision to improve our life, or some 
aspect of it, by deploying what is presented to us in terms 
of a technological solution or remedy (be it a smart speaker, 
a biometric pass port or chip implant etc.) has its forward 
reaching material implications as well as backward stretch-
ing roots. In other words, our interactions with technolo-
gies establish complex relational ecologies characterized by 
temporal, spatial and multi-agential structures and relations. 
In sum, this implies an understanding that thoroughly his-
toricizes humans, embeds them in webs of caretaking, while 
placing ethical responsibility in the present, on a horizon 
of anticipation and care (Adam and Groves 1; Groves 33).
13  Or as Plato put it: “An outstanding pilot [cybernetes] or doctor 
is aware [literally: feels her way through] of the difference between 
what is impossible in her art and what is possible, and she attempts 
the one, and lets the other go; and if, after all, she should still trip 
up in any way, she is competent to set himself aright” (Republic, 
360e–361a). The cybernetes is thus the exemplar of phronēsis as both 
practical wisdom and reflective judgment, and “navigation” a key 
metaphor and analogy of how we seek to manoeuvre through often 
unknown, potentially perilous territories and situations. Cf. Peters 
(60).
12  As Ajana similarly concludes: “paradoxically, in its pursuit of 
capturing the singularity of the person, biometrics only ends up by 
obstructing the exposure of singularity precisely because of its ampu-
tation of narrative from the sphere of identity” (2010, p. 252).


179
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181	
1 3
4  A manifesto for an existential ethics 
of care
As we stressed from the onset, the way in which the condi-
tions for debates on AI and ethics is set often makes the 
humanities disqualified from the start, despite the fact that 
ethics has for thousands of years constituted one of their 
core proficiencies. Through our deliberations we hope to 
have discounted such disrepute. In safeguarding the human 
defined as the existential body,  situating it in relation to bio-
metric technology—and in mapping some of the existential 
stakes and ethical concerns that biometrics raises within our 
contemporary lifeworlds—we also believe that we have in 
this article begun to ask the right questions.
We have argued through three scenarios that biometrics 
presents us with lived experiences amounting to massive 
forms of objectification of body, self and identity. This 
requires something new of us also as scholars. In the vein 
of Ajana, who calls for new ways of ‘performing’ research, 
we need approaches that “blur the boundaries between the 
creative/ experimental and the scholarly/academic […] that 
can implant the researcher straight at the heart of the burn-
ing socio-political and ethical issues in a radically embodied 
and affective way” (Beer 8, p. 331). One such approach is 
an existential ethics of care which will allow for the critical 
balancing, on the rim, between stressing potentially benefi-
cial and yet irreducibly burdensome dimensions of biomet-
rics—simultaneously (cf. Lagerkvist ed. 46, 48). An exis-
tential ethics of care implies in the first instance a conscious 
move back toward more fundamental questions of existential 
nature. We argue that we need to begin by revisiting core 
existential and humanistic questions as the foundation for 
thinking ethically about biometrics and responsible AI so 
as to expand on them, such as; what/who is human? What is 
a human body? How can we safeguard identified existential 
needs and necessities and human assets and values, in an age 
of increased automation? We suggest that such existentially 
informed questions (regardless whether they are answered 
or remain intentionally open) should become a basis for a 
diversified ethical approach. Heeding a plurality of ethical 
views is one prerequisite for arriving at responsible AI, or 
responsible technology at large. Hence, as we have seen, an 
existential ethics of care implies an interaction of multiple 
ethical traditions, beyond the current ethical turn—encoun-
ters that may both be beneficiary and entail friction, but fore-
most bring forward the human and her complex relations 
to identity and body. However, we hold that friction and 
difference in views can also be productive (Ess 21). Again, 
our intention is not to lean toward reconciliation of those 
views. Rather, by foregrounding the existential dimension of 
our inseparably entangled human coexistence with technolo-
gies, we hope to create a more solid ground for exploring 
how those views can productively speak to each other. One 
key merit of this proposed existential ethics of care is thus 
its insistence on productive and careful collisions as a vir-
tue in itself in a complex technological era. Importantly our 
existential ethics of care also recognizes that caring stretches 
beyond our own historical and technological moment. While 
often tightly, yet imperceptibly tied to environmental, social 
and racial forms of exploitation established in the past, these 
ecologies that we voluntarily or involuntarily compose, par-
take in, reconfigure or are, again, being persistently thrown 
into, subsequently form sediments for techno-realities (and 
techno-agencies) to come. An ethics of care thus also per-
tains to at/tending to one’s awareness of the faint layers, 
extensions and implications of technologies often operat-
ing beyond the scope of one’s individual life and yet with 
direct material implications on its currents (see Adam and 
Groves 1).
Our existential ethics of care is importantly not a solu-
tionist list of principles or suggestions, but a manifesto for a 
way of thinking about the ethical challenges of living with 
biometrics in today’s world. Hence, our intention here is 
not to contribute with another program for responsible AI, 
but instead to open up for a critical reflection about what it 
means to be human in the age of AI hype and inevitabilism. 
We have shown that the unprecedented increase of auto-
mated technologies rapidly brought into human lifeworlds 
unavoidably imposes new forms of orientations and disori-
entations, rearranging scales, coordinates and codes of con-
duct as we navigate through everyday life. But disorientation 
does not by any means entail a necessity for re-orientation 
(c.f. Ahmed 2) or a radical counter-move (de-orientation, if 
you will). Rather, this condition may as well be regarded an 
opportunity to stay with the friction, with renewed attention 
to these basic questions about the human existent, refusing 
any tech-solutionist impulse to straighten out the lines with 
the only goal to ‘terminate the program.’
Finally, we must stress that even in its most coherent form 
the existential ethics of care includes modes of question-
ing, rewiring and opening up ethical assumptions, rather 
than providing fixed tools or frameworks for solving ethi-
cal dilemmas. We believe that the focus on these existential 
dimensions and ethical concerns within human lived experi-
ence might be beneficial for not just one type of audience 
or one kind of expertise. Our intention instead is to inform 
relations that emerge in/through transdisciplinary collabora-
tion on responsible and meaningful technologies. Hence, in 
this essay we hope to have provided an agenda that illustrates 
the virtues of the existential approach to biometric technolo-
gies mobilized in conversation with other traditions by shed-
ding existential light on those relations, connections, threads 
and links between various perspectives (or shedding light 
on the lack thereof). While our contested techno-cultural 
condition might be indeed calling for a widely spanning 


180
	
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181
1 3
ethical approach (and for guidelines etc.), we have shown 
that this however also encompasses insights on a smaller 
scale, emanating from particular sites within our lifeworlds 
where our lives are played out. These may in turn serve as 
the foundation on which comprehensive frameworks—but 
also everyday interaction in human as well as more than 
human domains—can be built to address the complexities 
and prospects for ethical and responsible biometrics and AI.
Author contributions  This article has been a joint venture between all 
contributing authors, but the order of the authors reflects their level 
of contribution.
Funding  Open access funding provided by Uppsala University. The 
research has been enabled by a grant from The Marianne and Marcus 
Wallenberg Foundation (Grant MMW2019.0012) and is part of the 
project “BioMe: Existential Challenges and Ethical Imperatives of 
Biometric AI in Everyday Lifeworlds” within the WASP-HS progam: 
https://​wasp-​hs.​org.
Availability of data and material  Not applicable.
Code availability  Not applicable.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.
Ethical approval  The BioMe project has been approved by the Swedish 
National Authority for Ethics Approvals (2020-04982).
Consent to participate  Not applicable.
Consent for publication  Not applicable.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Adam B, Groves C (2011) Futures tended: care and future oriented 
responsibility. Bull Sci Technol Soc 31(1):17–27. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1177/​02704​67610​391237
Ahmed S (2006) Queer phenomenology. Orientations, objects, others. 
Duke University Press, Durham
Ajana B (2010) Recombinant identities: biometrics and narrative 
bioethics. Bioethical Inquiry 7:237–258. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​s11673-​010-​9228-4
Ajana B (2013) Governing through biometrics The biopolitics of 
identity. Palgrave Macmillan, London. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1057/​
97811​37290​755
Ajana B (2015) Augmented borders: big data and the ethics of immi-
gration control. JICES 13(1):58–78. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​
JICES-​01-​2014-​0005
Amoore L (2006) Biometric borders: governing mobilities in the war 
on terror. Polit Geogr 25:336–351. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
polgeo.​2006.​02.​001
Amoore L (2011) Data derivatives: on the emergence of a secu-
rity risk calculus for our times. Theory Cult Soc 28(6):24–43. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02632​76411​417430
Beer D (2014) The biopolitics of biometrics. An interview with Bti-
haj Ajana. Theory Cult Soc 31(7/8):330–336. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1177/​02632​76414​546380
Benjamin R (2019) Race after technology. Abolitionist tools for the 
new Jim Code. Polity Press, Cambridge. www.​kvab.​be/​sites/​
defau​lt/​rest/​blobs/​1501/​tw_​priva​cy_​en.​pdf
Berlant L, Warner M (1998) Sex in public. Crit Inq 24(2):547–566
Browne S (2015) Dark matters: on the surveillance of blackness. 
In: Duke UP, Durham Burgess J, Floridi, P, Pols, L, van den 
Hoven A, eds (2018) EDPS Ethics advisory group. Report 2018. 
18–01–25_eag_report_en.pdf (europa.eu)
Cantwell Smith B (2019) The promise of artificial intelligence: reck-
oning and judgment. MIT Press, Cambridge
Chouliaraki L, Georgiou M (2019) The digital border: mobil-
ity beyond territorial and symbolic divides. Eur J Commun 
34(6):594–605. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02673​23119​886147
Cifor M, Garcia P, Cowan, TL, Rault J, Sutherland T, Chan A, Rode 
J, Hoffmann AL, Saleh N, Nakamura L (2019) Feminist data 
manifest-No. https://​www.​manif​estno.​com/. Accessed 13 Mar 
2020
Coeckelbergh M (2020) AI ethics. MIT Press, London
Coeckelbergh M (2021) How to use virtue ethics for thinking about the 
moral standing of social robots: a relational interpretation in terms 
of practices, habits, and performance. Int J Soc Robot 13:31–40. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12369-​020-​00707-z
Dignum V (2019) Responsible artificial intelligence: how to develop 
and use AI in a responsible way. Springer
Dressel J, Farid H (2018) The accuracy, fairness, and limits of predict-
ing recidivism. Sci Adv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​sciadv.​aao55​80
Eckersley P (2018) Impossibility and uncertainty theorems in AI value 
alignment (or why your AGI should not have a utility function). 
Cornell University. arXiv:​1901.​00064 [cs.AI]
Ess C (2020a) Digital media ethics, 3rd edn. Polity, Cambridge
Ess C (2020b) Interpretative pros hen pluralism: from computer-medi-
ated colonization to a pluralistic intercultural digital ethics. Philos 
Technol. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s13347-​020-​00412-9
Ess C (2020c) Towards an existential and emancipatory ethic of tech-
nology. In: Vallor S (ed) Oxford handbook of philosophy and 
technology. OUP, Cambridge
Ess C (2019) Intercultural privacy: a Nordic perspective. In: Behrendt 
J, Loh W, Matzner T, Misselhorn C (eds) Privatsphäre 4.0. Eine 
Neuverortung des Privaten im Zeitalter der Digitalisierung, pp 
73–88. J.B. Metzler.
Eubanks V (2018) Automating inequality: how high-tech tools profile, 
police, and punish the poor. St. Martin’s Press, New York
European Union Agency for the operational management of large-scale 
IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice (2021) 
eu-LISA. https://​www.​eulisa.​europe.​eu. Accessed 22 Feb 2020
Floridi L (2016) Faultless responsibility: on the nature and allocation 
of moral responsibility for distributed moral actions. Philos Trans 
374(2083):20160112


181
AI & SOCIETY (2024) 39:169–181	
1 3
Floridi L, Cowls J, Beltrametti M, Chatila R, Chazerand P, Dignum 
V, Luetge C, Madelin R, Pagallo U, Rossi F, Schafer B, Valcke 
P, Vayena E (2018) An ethical framework for a good AI society: 
opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations. Mind Mach 
28:689–707. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11023-​018-​9482-5
Fors V, Pink S, Odell T (eds) (2020) The imagining of personal data: 
experiences of self -tracking. Taylor & Francis Group
Franzke AS (2020) An explorative qualitative analysis of AI ethics guide-
lines. Unpublished MS Gallagher R (2017) Videogames, identity 
and digital subjectivity. Routledge, New York
Gates K (2011) Our biometric future. New York University Press, New 
York
Gallagher R (2017) Videogames, identity and digital subjectivity. Rout-
ledge, New York, London 
GDPR (2018) General data protection regulation (GDPR) Official legal 
text. https://​gdpr-​info.​eu/. Accessed 3 Mar 2021
Gelman A, Mattson G, Simpson D (2018) Gaydar and the fallacy of 
decontextualized measurement. Sociol Sci 5:270–280. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​15195/​v5.​a12
Groves C (2021) Flourishing for the future: anticipation as meta-capabil-
ity. In: Spiers E, Lopez-Galviz C, Spiers E (eds) Routledge hand-
book of social futures. Routledge, London
Häggström O (2021) Tänkande maskiner. Den artificiella intelligensens 
genombrott. Fri tanke, Stockholm
Harwell D, Fowler GA (2019) U.S. customs and border protection says 
photos of travellers were taken in a data breach. The Washington 
Post. https://​www.​washi​ngton​post.​com/​techn​ology/​2019/​06/​10/​
us-​custo​ms-​border-​prote​ction-​says-​photos-​trave​lers-​into-​out-​count​
ry-​were-​recen​tly-​taken-​data-​breach/. Accessed 15 Mar 15 2020
Hayles NK (2017) Unthought: the power of the cognitive nonconscious. 
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Held M (2006) Smart technologies and the end(s) of law: novel entangle-
ments of law and technology. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham
Held V (2006) The ethics of care: personal, political, and global. Oxford 
University Press
Hines A (2018) Magnet implants? Welcome to the world of medical punk. 
The New York Times. https://​www.​nytim​es.​com/​2018/​05/​12/​us/​
grind​fest-​magnet-​impla​nts-​bioha​cking.​htm. Accessed 10 Jan 2020
House A (2014) The real cyborgs. The Telegraph. http://s.​teleg​raph.​co.​
uk/​graph​ics/​proje​cts/​the-​future-​is-​andro​id/. Accessed 10 Jan 202
IEEE (2019) The IEEE global initiative on ethics of autonomous and 
intelligent systems. Ethically aligned design: a vision for prioritiz-
ing human well-being with autonomous and intelligent systems, 1st 
Edition. https://​stand​ards.​ieee.​org/​conte​nt/​ieee-​stand​ards/​en/​indus​
try-​conne​ctions/​ec/​auton​omous-​syste​ms.​html
Jaspers K (1932) [1970]) Philosophy, vol II. University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago
Keshavarz M (2019) The design politics of the passport: materiality, 
immobility, and dissent. Bloomsbury
Kosinski M, Wang Y (2018) Deep neural networks are more accurate than 
humans at detecting sexual orientation from facial images. J Pers 
Soc Psychol 114(2):246–257. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​pspa0​000098
Lagerkvist A (2017) Existential media: toward a theorization of digital 
thrownness. New Media Soc 19(1):96–110. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​
14614​44816​649921
Lagerkvist A (ed) (2019) Digital existence: ontology, ethics and tran-
scendence in digital culture. Routledge, London. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
4324/​97813​15107​479
Lagerkvist A (2020) Digital limit situations: anticipatory media beyond 
‘the new AI era.’ JDSR 2(3):16–41. https://​doi.​org/​10.​33621/​jdsr.​
v2i3.​55
Lagerkvist A (2022) Existential media. A media theory of the limit situ-
ation. Oxford University Press, New York
Levinas E (1961 [1979]) Totality and infinity. An essay on exteriority. 
Springer Science & Business Media
Lin J, Jongbin J, Sharad G, Skeem J (2020) The limits of human predic-
tions of recidivism. Sci Adv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​sciadv.​aaz06​52
Lupton D (2016) The quantified self. Polity, Oxford
Lupton, D (2017) The quantified self. Wiley. Hoboken 
Lury C, Day S (2019) Algorithmic personalization as a mode of individu-
ation (2019). Theory Cult Soc 36(2):17–37. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​
02632​76418​81888
MacKenzie C, Stoljar N (eds) (2000) Relational autonomy: feminist per-
spectives on autonomy, agency, and the social self. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, New York
Magnet S (2011) When biometrics fail: gender, race, and the technology 
of identity. Duke University Press, Durham
Merleau-Ponty M (2014) Phenomenology of perception. Routledge, Oxon
Noble S (2018) Algorithms of oppression: how search engines reinforce 
racism. NYU Press, New York
Noddings N (1984) Caring: a relational approach to ethics and moral 
education. University of California Press, London
Norlock K (2019) Feminist ethics. In: Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford ency-
clopedia of philosophy (Summer 2019 Edition). https://​plato.​stanf​
ord.​edu/​archi​ves/​sum20​19/​entri​es/​femin​ism-​ethics/
O’Neil C (2016) Weapons of math destruction: how big data increases 
inequality and threatens democracy. Crown, New York
Peters JD (2015) The marvelous clouds: toward a philosophy of elemental 
media. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Pfeifer M (2021) Intelligent Borders? Securitizing Smartphones in the 
European Border Regime. Culture Mach vol. 20. https://​cultu​remac​
hine.​net/​vol-​20-​machi​ne-​intel​ligen​ces/​intel​ligent-​borde​rs-​secur​itizi​
ng-​smart​phones-​in-​the-​europ​ean-​border-​regime-​miche​lle-​pfeif​er/
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2017) Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more 
than human worlds. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
Ruddick S (1989) Maternal thinking: toward a politics of peace. Beacon 
Press, Boston
Thacker, E (2004) Biomedia. University of Minnesota Press. 
Minneapolis
Tronto JC (1993) Moral boundaries: a political argument for an ethic of 
care. Routledge, New York
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2016) ICE investigative case 
management DHS/ICE/PIA-045. https://​www.​dhs.​gov/​sites/​defau​
lt/​files/​publi​catio​ns/​priva​cy-​pia-​ice-​icm-​june2​016.​pdf. Accessed 
15 Mar 2020
Vallor S (2016) Technology and the virtues: a philosophical guide to a 
future worth wanting. Oxford University Press, New York
Verbeek PP (2011) Moralizing technology: understanding and designing 
the morality of things. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago
World Economic Forum (2020) A framework for responsible limits on 
facial recognition. http://​www3.​wefor​um.​org/​docs/​WEF_​Frame​
work_​for_​action_​Facial_​recog​nition_​2020.​pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 
2020
Zuboff S (2019) The age of surveillance capitalism: the fight for a human 
future at the new frontier of power. Profile Books, London
Zweig K (2022) An Algorithm has no sense of tact (MIT Press, 2022): Ein 
Algorithmus hat kein Taktgefühl: Wo künstliche Intelligenz sich irrt, 
warum uns das betrifft und was wir dagegen tun können. [An Algo-
rithm has no sense of tact: where AI makes mistakes, why that affects 
us, and what we can do about it]. Heyne Verlag, München 2019
Zylinska J (2014) Minimal ethics for the Anthropocene. Open Humani-
ties Press, London
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


