# 12. 연구논문_Artificial intelligence innovation of tourism businesses From satisfied tourists to continued service usage intention

---
**Source:** [[12. 연구논문_Artificial intelligence innovation of tourism businesses From satisfied tourists to continued service usage intention.pdf]]
**Category:** #mba #ai
**Imported:** 2026-03-05

International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
Available online 25 January 2024
0268-4012/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Research article 
Artificial intelligence innovation of tourism businesses: From satisfied 
tourists to continued service usage intention 
Edward C.S. Ku a,*,1, Chun-Der Chen b,2 
a National Kaohsiung University of Hospitality and Tourism, Department of Travel Management, No.1, Songhe Rd., Xiaogang Dist., Kaohsiung City 81271, Taiwan, ROC 
b Department of Business Administration, Ming Chuan University, No. 130, Jihe Rd., Shihlin District, Taipei City 111, Taiwan, ROC   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Artificial intelligence 
Socio-technical systems 
Emotions 
Tourism businesses 
Functional benefits 
A B S T R A C T   
The study analyzes how tourism businesses satisfy customers through artificial intelligence innovation services. 
Based on the socio-technical system perspective and emotions, the research framework was proposed and 
analyzed using the partial least squares (PLS-SEM) approach. By collecting questionnaire data over two years 
(2022 and 2023 from Beijing, Hangzhou, Taipei, and Singapore) and conducting in-depth interviews with a well- 
known travel agency and AI service development company in Taiwan, this could thus provide a combination of 
quantitative and qualitative evidence to enhance the study’s validity. Our research findings indicate that AI 
innovation and new product advantage significantly enhance functional benefits, strengthening tourist satis­
faction and continued AI service usage intention. However, the moderating effects of positive user experience 
and perceived anthropomorphism are not supported. Building upon the previous research results, this study 
proposes relevant theoretical contributions, practical implications, and insightful suggestions for tourism busi­
nesses seeking to implement AI services to improve customer satisfaction.   
1. Introduction 
Artificial intelligence (AI) has a significant impact on tourism busi­
nesses (Dwivedi et al., 2021; Hradecky et al., 2022) as AI is based on the 
capabilities of machines to perform cognitive functions related to the 
human mind through computation (Dwivedi et al., 2023; Hradecky 
et al., 2022). From the socio-technical systems perspective, tourism 
products provided by tourism businesses will integrate a large amount of 
data processed in a cloud computing system (Ben Yahia et al., 2021; 
Schuhbert et al., 2023). Moreover, in a sharp benefit of robotics service 
(Rasheed, He, Khizar, Abbas, 2023; Wong, Tan, Ooi, Dwivedi, 2023), 
analyzing the interactive use of social and artificial intelligence tech­
nologies can help develop more intelligent applications for tourism 
companies and improve tourist satisfaction, which is of great help to 
tourism businesses. 
This study analyzes how tourism businesses can satisfy their cus­
tomers through AI innovations and applications. Since 2021, the tourism 
industry has witnessed an increase in innovative AI services. For 
example, the hotel industry has adopted unmanned check-in services 
that allow guests to verify their identities through facial recognition. 
Hotels have also integrated room keys with mobile apps, enabling guests 
to access their rooms directly by scanning the app on a door lock (Binesh 
& Baloglu, 2023). In food service, robots are used in food delivery and 
automated ordering systems (Rasheed, He, Khizar, Abbas, 2023). Travel 
agencies have introduced chatbots to assist travelers with itinerary 
planning and recommendations (Lalicic & Weismayer, 2021). 
AI-powered services have significantly enhanced the travel industry’s 
service processes, product quality, and customer satisfaction. 
From the perspective of AI innovation, researchers have conducted 
transformational studies on the functions and strategies of AI applica­
tions (Lv et al., 2022; Schuhbert et al., 2023). Tourism businesses play a 
dual role in the industry. On the one hand, they enhance resource dis­
tribution to gain a competitive advantage and satisfy tourists (Diaz et al., 
2023). On the other hand, these businesses provide experiential services 
that deeply resonate with tourists, often leveraging AI innovation. 
Accordingly, from the perspective of emotions, perceived anthropo­
morphism (Spatola & Wudarczyk, 2021) and positive user experience 
(Serrano et al., 2021) attract tourists repurchase behavior, which may 
cause alternate emotional reactions that affect brand loyalty to tourism 
businesses. 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: edwardku@mail.nkuht.edu.tw (E.C.S. Ku).   
1 ORCID: 0000–0002-4412–4908  
2 ORCID: 0000–0002-2840–984X 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
International Journal of Information Management 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2024.102757 
Received 2 August 2022; Received in revised form 6 November 2023; Accepted 15 January 2024   


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
2
Tourism businesses have applied AI services to examine the re­
lationships among the service quality of businesses, perceived value, and 
tourist satisfaction (Dwivedi et al., 2023). From a competitive perspec­
tive, functional benefits from tourists are a significant factor for tourists, 
and AI innovation can enhance the advantage for tourism businesses. On 
the other hand, the anthropomorphism of AI applications can foster a 
warmer service experience (Kaya et al., 2022). Thus, tourism businesses 
need to consider how to use AI innovation to transform user experiences 
into more valuable services, employing a flexible business model. The 
innovation and transformation of tourism businesses revolve around 
consumer experiences. In addition to modular merchandise services, 
tourism businesses could provide AI-based customized services in 
response to the tourism supply chain, speed up development, and utilize 
cross-industry cooperation and cross-domain integration to create a 
unique service experience for tourists. 
The structure of this study is as follows: First, we outline our research 
objectives, purposes, and theoretical background, followed by a detailed 
description of the methodology and the use of PLS_SEM for the statistical 
analysis, which leads to our results. Finally, we discuss the implications 
of our results and provide recommendations for future studies. 
2. Literature review 
2.1. The perspective of socio-technical systems 
The socio-technical system perspective refers to the combination of 
“society” and “technology” as a complex, interdependent system which 
explains and improves the design and performance of organizational 
techniques (Wang, Dilanchiev et al., 2022). From this perspective, 
tourism businesses must rely on vast amounts of tourist-related data 
processed in cloud computing systems. 
We argue that AI innovation (Dwivedi et al., 2021; Wong, Tan, Ooi, 
Dwivedi, 2023) and new product advantage (Kumar, 2023) are two 
determinants from the socio-technical system perspective. Research on 
tourism products suggests that product advantage can be fully satisfied 
by businesses’ information and communications technology (ICT) 
innovation (Kumar, 2023). These technological developments increased 
the number of potential tourists, usage for sharing destination infor­
mation, and shared experiences, thereby favoring the tourism 
businesses. 
In tourism business development, AI depends on ICT innovation. 
Tourism businesses collect and transmit essential data by establishing 
high-speed communication networks (Bencsik et al., 2023; Waqar et al., 
2023). The interaction between society and technology helps tourism 
businesses develop competitive information (Abou-Foul et al., 2023; Ben 
Yahia et al., 2021). Therefore, entrepreneurs must consider emerging 
technologies as critical indicators for transforming tourism businesses. 
2.2. The perspective of emotions 
Various conceptual paradigms in many AI-related disciplines 
consider emotional perspectives (Jiang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). 
From the perspective of emotions, perceived anthropomorphism 
(Chiang et al., 2022; Spatola & Wudarczyk, 2021; B. Li et al., 2023; Y. Li 
et al., 2023) and positive user experience (Gunay et al., 2022; Hsu & 
Lee, 2023) play crucial roles. Customer emotion mediates the relation­
ship between voice AI service failure and customer complaint behavior 
(B. Li et al., 2023; Y. Li et al., 2023), implying that enterprises’ AI-based 
chatbots can affect customers’ emotions and develop countermeasures. 
Previous studies have demonstrated that brand experience 
emotionally affects brand loyalty (J.N. Sun, Xu et al., 2022; Y. Sun, Xu 
et al., 2022), especially the relationship between consumer passion for a 
brand, self-brand connection, and brand emotion. Furthermore, because 
tourists’ views are internal and personal, brand experiences must be 
attuned to their unique and complex emotions ( (Wang et al., 2023), as 
their emotional response to the brand is the main reason for their loyalty 
to the company. Tourism businesses must strengthen and develop 
long-term relationships between brands and consumers (Khan & Abbas, 
2023), and incorporating green marketing can enhance experiential 
marketing practices. 
2.3. AI innovation in tourism businesses 
Tourism businesses develop when it is increasingly difficult for en­
trepreneurs to distance themselves from elements that maintain specific 
strategic thinking and behavior (Zaragoza-Saez et al., 2022) (Dwivedi 
et al., 2021). AI innovation allows tourists to express travel experiences 
to bypass tourism businesses (Suder et al., 2022). It also clarifies some of 
the reforms of AI on tourism business operations, focusing on enhancing 
resource distribution to gain a competitive advantage (Krakowski et al., 
2022; Sun, Xu et al., 2022) and satisfy tourists (Li & Zhang, 2022). 
Accordingly, AI also plays a vital role in innovation and sustaining 
competitive advantages for tourism businesses; however, critical dif­
ferences regarding the effects of diverse, dynamic capabilities remain. 
Tourism businesses must adopt AI as a unique business model and 
carefully select cooperative suppliers in dynamically competitive 
environments. 
The development of artificial intelligence has improved the pro­
duction efficiency of Chinese enterprises (B.B. Xie, Gong et al., 2023; C. 
H. Xie, Gong et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023), and the incorporation of 
artificial intelligence is critical to building intelligent automation tech­
nologies for a sustainable future of tourism (Tong et al., 2022); the ap­
plications of AI in tourism businesses scenarios, travel distribution, 
outbound travel, and travel itinerary planning include (1) The interac­
tion between "technology and people," such as the impact of 
human-computer interaction on services, and human-machine hybrid 
organization (Rasheed, He, Khizar, Abbas, 2023); since the tourism in­
dustry is Taiwan’s most valuable economic industry, the Taiwan Lantern 
Festival, for example, makes full use of AI innovative technology to 
allow the public to enjoy the 360-degree lantern festival scene, creating 
mobile business opportunities and multimedia services to market city 
tourism < https://www.ndc.gov.tw/nc_8456_29930> (2) The relation­
ship between technology and emotions in service (Allal-Cherif, 2022); 
with the support and encouragement of China’s national policies, the 
number of innovative artificial intelligence entrepreneurs has increased 
significantly (Miao, 2020); and (3) Service failure and service recovery 
caused by AI assist (Lv et al., 2022) (Kim et al., 2023), it is essential to 
understand consumer responses to AI and its sustainable development. 
Tourism businesses need AI and employees with specific skills to provide 
instant tourist service. 
We integrate the views of AI using two approaches: socio-technical 
systems and the perspective of emotions. Previous research has exam­
ined robot-based applications and services in the restaurant industry, 
the impact of AI on restaurants’ operational costs, and the quality of 
service to tourists (Nam et al., 2021). Similarly, hotels use AI technology 
to solve factors such as tourist data information, booking uncertainty, 
and other factors with their parallel processing capabilities, adapt­
ability, and good fault tolerance (Shuqair et al., 2022). Moreover, AI can 
solve operational problems through nonlinear analysis and compensate 
for the inadequacies of traditional lodging industry forecasting methods 
(Wang, 2022). AI algorithms have also been used by travel business 
marketers to forecast tourism demand (Li et al., 2021). Companies 
leverage AI innovation to adjust to sudden variations, risks, and op­
portunities in their operational strategies. 
Tourism businesses want to manage their environments to benefit 
significantly from AI innovations. Moreover, dynamic capability theory 
indicates that tourism businesses must integrate adjustable resources 
and best practices in an information-rich environment to successfully 
explore the basis of competition, which meets tourist demand for 
products and services in a fluctuating and fast-moving market environ­
ment. From an emotional perspective, the triggering effect of a deep 
emotional connection between tourism businesses and consumers grows 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
3
to establish a strong emotional bond. 
3. Hypothesis development 
Fig. 1 shows the relationships between the essential constructs 
analyzed in this study. 
3.1. AI innovation and the functional benefit of tourism products 
Innovation refers to introducing a new object or idea that becomes a 
part of a dynamic process (Kumar et al., 2023). AI innovation includes 
product and process innovations (Hradecky et al., 2022). Previous 
research has indicated that product and process innovation is essential 
for technological change and economic development (Zhou et al., 2022; 
Trevlopoulos et al., 2023). Tourism businesses continue experimenting 
with new materials or methods to find more suitable products and ser­
vices that appeal to tourists. This emphasizes breakthroughs in techno­
logical research and the development of product functions, market 
definitions, and segmentation behaviors to impart new value to 
products. 
Previous literature on new products showed that scholars have also 
proposed aspects of product innovation to observe (Monteiro & Adler, 
2022) and divided the degree of product innovation into tourist view­
points (Kan et al., 2023; Sigalat-Signes et al., 2020). Tourist viewpoints 
are the attributes of innovation, adoption risk, and established behav­
ioral pattern changes. These are crucial factors when considering the 
degree of product innovation from a tourist’s perspective. The tourism 
business perspective includes familiarity with the environment, appli­
cability of new product development, and technological and marketing 
aspects. These are crucial factors regarding the degree of product 
innovation from a tourism business perspective. 
Besides, functional benefits are regarded as the external advantages 
of products or services and are usually related to the product attributes 
tourists select (Ku, 2020; Zhang et al., 2023). Previous research has 
stated that the functional benefits of products affect customer and 
organizational performance indicators and are related to corporate 
business and long-term financial performance (Foroudi et al., 2020). 
Thus, the functional benefits of tourism products allow tourists to 
experience the actual or technical advantages of a specific product or 
service for tourism businesses, increasing their value. 
Functional benefits are related to potential needs as recognized by 
society or through personal expression (Huang et al., 2022; Le et al., 
2023), as well as interpersonal communication. Tourists value tourism 
business services and products’ prestige, exclusivity, and fashion. From 
a social identity perspective, recognizing tourism businesses allows only 
a few people to access unique travel products. 
When tourism businesses provide excellent AI services and innova­
tive products, tourists naturally prefer these businesses over competi­
tors, as they perceive them to offer superior service quality. Brand 
preference is demonstrated by tourists who have positive beliefs about 
tourism businesses, which improves the overall evaluation of the prod­
uct, thereby leading us to the first hypothesis. 
Hypothesis 1.
AI innovation in tourism businesses is positively related 
to the functional benefits for tourists. 
3.2. New product advantage with AI innovation of tourism businesses 
The product advantage of tourism businesses refers to the benefits of 
new products that tourists expect (Fraccastoro et al., 2021; Kan et al., 
2023). Additionally, the product advantage represents the superiority 
and uniqueness of a product in the market compared to others (Yuk & 
Garrett, 2023). Moreover, the product advantage of tourism businesses 
is positively related to operational performance (Nayak et al., 2021; 
Suryani et al., 2022). When tourists perceive that tourism businesses can 
provide innovative product attributes superior to competitors, highly 
innovative services become a competitive advantage for tourism busi­
nesses. Therefore, highly innovative products contribute to the compe­
tition of tourism businesses. 
Developing new advantages for tourism products is crucial in the 
rapidly growing and competitive environment. Previous research has 
shown a significant relationship between cultural sharing and the choice 
of tourism products (Kan et al., 2023). Tourists often expect AI services 
to yield optimum results and benefits (Paul et al., 2023; Radhakrishnan 
et al., 2022). In new normal circumstances, tourism businesses must 
offer unique benefits that surpass standard tourism products to cater to 
tourists’ needs. 
Successful tourism businesses provide tourists with the products they 
need, satisfy their expectations, and provide unique benefits. In this 
study, tourism businesses that provide product advantages through AI 
innovation affect tourists’ product preferences and choices. Thus, Hy­
pothesis 2 is proposed as follows: 
Hypothesis 2.
Tourism businesses’ new product advantages positively 
relate to tourists’ functional benefits. 
Fig. 1. Research model.  
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
4
3.3. Satisfaction of the tourism businesses 
The selection process for tourism businesses is considered satisfac­
tory when the degree of satisfaction is related to the characteristics of 
the selection set (Huang et al., 2018). The factors affecting tourist 
satisfaction with tourism businesses include service design, service 
support, knowledge analysis capabilities, and customer service 
innovation. 
Previous studies have shown that effective online travel services can 
ensure good service quality for tourists while increasing their service 
value (Foroudi et al., 2020; Le et al., 2023). Accordingly, a unique 
functional advantage is the time and effort spent searching for specific 
services that stimulate tourists to adopt AI services. 
In addition, tourism businesses offer opportunities and advantages 
for experiential marketing that improves the satisfaction levels of tour­
ists through emotional and functional values related to perceptions and 
AI service quality. Tourism businesses that adapt accordingly will gain 
in-depth capabilities related to strategic thinking on tourists’ experi­
ences, formulate effective marketing strategies, and build an operating 
environment that maximizes the value of the experience. Therefore, 
Hypothesis 3 is as follows: 
Hypothesis 3.
The functional benefits of tourism products are posi­
tively related to tourists’ satisfaction with tourism businesses. 
3.4. Continued AI service usage intention of tourism businesses 
Continued service usage intention by tourists reflects a motivational 
influence that drives their behavior (Leung et al., 2022; Alalwan, 2020). 
Although mainstream AI service research has explored the determinants 
of tourist acceptance and the use of tourism businesses, the ultimate 
success of innovative technologies depends more on tourists’ willingness 
to continue using them. To identify the main predictors of customers’ 
continued intention to use AI services online, Kim et al. (2017) argued 
that if customers perceive that using AI services is functional for 
selecting tourism products, they will have a positive attitude. To test 
these hypotheses, Kim et al. (2017) surveyed over three hundred users of 
AI tourism services. They found that perceived usefulness, enjoyment, 
and social influence were significant positive predictors of attitude. 
Moreover, they also found that attitude significantly predicted 
continued intention to use the services. Similarly, continuous use 
intention is crucial for tourism businesses’ survival and customer 
retention in terms of market competition. 
Previous research has also pointed out that satisfactory AI services 
provide tourists with an unforgettable travel experience (Thumrongvut 
et al., 2022; Pitakaso et al., 2023) and that AI services affect the ad­
vantages of tourism products (Bedue & Fritzsche, 2022; Zhang et al., 
2021). Tourists’ travel experiences are usually related to their travel 
impressions and knowledge of past destinations, such as what they see 
and hear and the destination experience. 
Participating in tourism reduces daily life pressures for tourists and 
enhances their knowledge as travelers. It offers leisure and entertain­
ment, activates their bodies, and minds, and fosters self-recognition, 
emotional relief, and satisfaction. Thus, frequent travelers actively 
seek to increase these positive experiences. This leads us to Hypothesis 
4: 
Hypothesis 4.
The functional benefits of tourism products are related 
to tourists’ continued intention to use AI services. 
Tourists’ AI service usage determines consumers’ repeated purchase 
decisions (Jo & Hi, 2023), depending on their determination of previous 
tourism businesses’ satisfaction decisions. In addition, from the 
perspective of the socio-technical system, the intention to continue using 
specific tourism businesses is closely related to the behavior of tourists 
(Karampournioti & Wiedmann, 2021). Tourist satisfaction with prod­
ucts critically affects future tourism service usage behaviors (Ku, 2022; 
Nilashi et al., 2022) and AI service adoption (B. Li et al., 2023; Y. Li 
et al., 2023; Schuhbert et al., 2023). Specifically, AI service satisfaction 
drives tourist choice behavior in social exchanges. 
Tourism businesses should provide accurate travel information so 
that tourists’ beliefs about the quality of information positively affect 
their intentions to reuse AI services. In other words, business operations 
in a competitive environment depend on whether they are qualified to 
help tourists complete their travel tasks and, thus, their effect on 
continued decision-making. Similarly, when tourists feel that tourism 
businesses need to be more trustworthy or that staff are unwilling to 
provide sincere help, they may be more willing to choose tourism 
products via AI innovation. This leads us to Hypothesis 5. 
Hypothesis 5.
Tourist satisfaction positively impacts the continued AI 
service usage intention. 
3.5. The positive user experience 
Positive user experiences refer to the memory of real situations that a 
tourist revisits based on activities, consequences, and satisfaction with 
the knowledge (Huang et al., 2021; Priya & Sharma, 2023). Prior 
research has argued that AI services deliver functional and emotional 
value to tourists (Elkhwesky & Elkhwesky, 2023). The product advan­
tages of tourism businesses, based on insights from positive psychology, 
can help tourists realize pleasant, meaningful, and virtuous experiences. 
Researchers have argued that AI provides product advantages and 
travel experiences to match tourists’ needs in tourism businesses (Yoon 
et al., 2020). AI technology on user engagement and conversion leads to 
higher transactional activity and increased sales performance (Rad­
hakrishnan et al., 2022). Using emotional perspectives, the relationship 
between tourists and tourism businesses’ innovation of tourism products 
can be better understood by incorporating personalized recommenda­
tions in the user experience. 
Hypothesis 6.
Positive user experience moderates the relationship 
between AI innovation and functional benefits. 
Positive user experiences are crucial in the interaction between 
tourists and AI service usage (Elkhwesky & Elkhwesky, 2023). This 
interaction highlights the relationship between tourist experiences and 
the hedonic benefits of interacting with AI services tourism businesses 
offer. 
Tourism businesses provide tourists with unique functional benefits. 
In addition to mapping emotions to gain a comprehensive understanding 
of tourists’ travel experiences, tourism businesses help improve itinerary 
planning and overall travel experiences. 
Hypothesis 7.
Positive user experience moderates the relationship 
between new product advantages and functional benefits. 
3.6. Perceived anthropomorphism of AI 
Perceived anthropomorphism refers to giving branded products and 
services a human-like form and human characteristics, including AI 
innovation appearance and personality (Pelau et al., 2021); perceived 
anthropomorphism aims to create a more "emotional" human-computer 
interaction experience (Priya & Sharma, 2023). 
Prior research has argued that perceived anthropomorphism has a 
substantial positive impact on the perceived usefulness of AI (B. Li et al., 
2023; Y. Li et al., 2023; Tojib et al., 2022). Research has also suggested 
that textually perceived anthropomorphism represents a new commu­
nication strategy for the tourism business (Chen et al., 2021). Many 
tourism marketers use perceived anthropomorphism strategies to evoke 
consumers’ willingness to repurchase tourism products. 
Tourists evaluate brand consumption based on valid subjective re­
sponses to a target tourism product or service. Perceived anthropo­
morphism of AI means that tourists will be attracted to buying tourism 
products that meet their needs. Likewise, brand trust will be associated 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
5
with the quality of tourism businesses, leading us to Hypothesis 8. 
Hypothesis 8.
The perceived anthropomorphism of AI moderates the 
relationship between the functional benefits of tourism products and 
tourists’ satisfaction levels with tourism businesses. 
Users can measure the quality of AI according to the degree of safety, 
reliability, anthropomorphism, convenience, diversity, and privacy 
protection of enterprises using AI (McLean et al., 2021; pp, 7, 1123, 
1114; Park & Namkung, 2021). Previous research has shown that users 
tend to disclose more personal information to human-servant and 
robot-mentor intelligent agents than human-mentor and robot-servant 
intelligent agents (Zhang & Rau, 2023). The more familiar tourists are 
with luxury brands, the stronger their desire for perceived anthropo­
morphism of tourism AI innovation products. In addition, tourism 
businesses’ AI services may affect tourists’ brand attitudes and purchase 
intentions toward brands with different personalities (Yang & Hu, 
2022). 
When tourists learn about tourism brands related to their identity, 
they pay premium prices for branded products with AI innovations 
(Guan et al., 2021). Therefore, tourism companies should consider 
innovative AI products’ cognitive and emotional components. There­
fore, we argue that the perceived anthropomorphism of AI moderates 
the relationship between the functional benefits of tourism products and 
tourists’ continued intentions to use AI services. Therefore, Hypothesis 9 
is proposed as follows. 
Hypothesis 9.
The perceived anthropomorphism of AI moderates the 
relationship between the functional benefits of tourism products and 
tourists’ continued intention to use AI services. 
3.7. Control variables 
Control variables (CV) are used to examine the influencing factors 
outside the theoretical model that explain the variance in the dependent 
variable. Prior studies have argued that the classification of tourism 
businesses (Li et al., 2021) and location (Suder et al., 2022) may influ­
ence tourists’ continued AI service usage intention regarding the AI 
service of tourism products. In this study, as the sample collection is 
from a multinational sample, we state these two factors as CV, which 
controls for the practical analysis of AI services of tourism industry 
businesses. 
4. Research design 
The study conducted a two-period questionnaire survey (Study 1 and 
Study 2); tourism businesses are the target samples in the research, and 
AI service usage in restaurants, hotels, and travel agencies is selected as 
the sampling framework; this study also employed interviews with three 
experts to enhance the validity of causal relationships (Study 3); ac­
cording to Jung and Park (2018) guidelines, interviews were confirmed 
experts and an interview outline was provided (please view Appendix 
1), which gained a deeper understanding of the applications and limi­
tations of AI innovation in tourism businesses. 
4.1. Sampling process 
First, tourism businesses in Beijing, Hangzhou, Taipei, and Singapore 
were invited to participate based on the research purpose, as these cities 
have had a significant adoption of AI services in tourism businesses for 
more than three years. Second, the management level was randomly 
selected by the participating tourism businesses. The survey was then 
emailed to the person in charge of the AI service with a hyperlink to the 
electronic research questionnaires. The key personnel distributed the 
survey to their staff, prioritizing management-level employees. This 
study adopted a two-stage questionnaire survey approach to address 
concerns about temporal causal relationships in cross-sectional studies 
(Maier et al., 2023). 
Data collection for the first stage occurred in March 2022, and the 
second stage was in April 2023. In the first stage, 800 tourism businesses 
were selected, with 200 companies chosen from each of the four major 
international cities mentioned above (Dwivedi et al., 2021). Question­
naires were distributed via email, and measures were taken to verify IP 
addresses and prevent duplicate responses. 371 completed question­
naires were received in this stage, resulting in a response rate of 46.38%. 
In the second stage (Year 2023), 150 companies were selected from the 
same four major international cities, distributing 600 questionnaires. 
Subsequently, 279 completed questionnaires were received, yielding a 
response rate of 46.5%. 
4.2. Measures 
Questionnaire items were developed by conducting a literature re­
view of related topics. We adopted a structure that can be used as a 
research model for related research and revised some wording following 
our investigation. Thus, we identified 25 potential survey items. Opin­
ions were indicated using a 5-point Likert scale (Table 1), where 
1 = strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree. 
The questionnaire was constructed based on existing measures 
deemed suitable for this study. We edited and modified the English 
questionnaire and translated it into Chinese. From a content validity 
perspective, three professors focused on tourism management and two 
on information management were invited to refine and verify the survey 
items for translation accuracy. We invited 40 employees in tourism 
businesses to participate in the pretest, 20 participants for the Chinese 
version of the questionnaire and 20 participants for the English version. 
Participants were required to evaluate whether the research content was 
easy to understand and correlated with the context. 
5. Study 1 
5.1. Method 
First, regarding the sample of Study 1, the data collected in March 
2022 revealed that nearly 38.5% of the respondents were males, and 
more than 60% were over 41 years old. Among the participants, 49.1% 
belonged to restaurants, and 43.4% came from Hangzhou (Table 2). 
Besides, as with all self-reported research, common method bias 
(CMB) can arise from various sources, such as positive user experience 
and satisfaction (Liang et al., 2007). A Harmon one-factor test was 
conducted on the seven potential variables in the research model to 
assess the severity of CMB in this study. The results showed that the 
explained covariance of the seven potential constructs was 22.47% in 
the data collected in 2022 and 43.25% for Year 2023, indicating the 
absence of common method bias in the analytical results. 
A PLS-SEM analysis was employed in this study using SmartPLS 
Version 4 to assess reliability, validity, and hypothesis analysis. 
Convergent validity was examined first, and all indicators demonstrated 
standardized factor loadings greater than or equal to 0.7. Additionally, 
the average variance extracted (AVE) values for each construct were all 
above 0.5, and both Cronbach’s alpha and composite reliability (CR) 
values exceeded 0.7 (Benitez et al., 2018). These findings indicate 
satisfactory reliability and convergent validity for all construct items 
(Table 3). 
Furthermore, the discriminant validity of the constructs was 
assessed. The AVE values for each construct were higher than the cor­
relation coefficients with other constructs in the study model (Table 4). 
The Heterotrait-Monotrait (HTMT) ratio was also calculated, with all 
values below 0.9 (B.B. Xie, Gong et al., 2023; C.H. Xie, Gong et al., 
2023), indicating satisfactory discriminant validity. 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
6
5.2. Results 
The hypothesis testing results for the data collected in 2022 are 
presented in Fig. 2. Regarding the main effects, all hypotheses are sup­
ported except for the impact of artificial intelligence innovation on 
functional benefits. However, perceived anthropomorphism signifi­
cantly moderates the relationships between functional benefits and 
satisfaction and between functional benefits and continued artificial 
intelligence service usage intention. Unexpectedly, perceived anthro­
pomorphism negatively modified the relationship between functional 
benefit and continued artificial intelligence service usage intention 
(β = −0.080, t = 2.65). 
Table 1 
Item in survey.  
Construct  
Item 
Factor Loadings 
(2022/3 for Study 
1) 
Factor Loadings 
(2023/4 for Study 
2) 
References 
Artificial Intelligence Innovation (AII) 
AII1 
The development and experimentation of artificial 
intelligence involves organizational strategy.  
0.868  
0.824 
Olan et al. (2022); 
Huang and Rust 
(2021) 
AII2 
The efficiency of artificial intelligence is improved with 
strategic intelligence.  
0.829  
0.786 
AII3 
An artificial intelligence system supports organizational 
strategies by reviewing processes where intelligent 
strategy can be implemented.  
0.765  
0.753 
AII4 
Artificial intelligence is essential for enhanced 
organizational performance.  
0.869  
0.840 
New Product Advantage (NPA) 
NPA1 
The quality of the tourism product compared well with 
similar competitor products.  
0.905  
0.869 
Cui and Wu, (2017) 
NPA2 
The product was of higher quality than competing 
products available to tourists.  
0.903  
0.867 
NPA3 
The tourism product solved problems tourists had with 
competitor products.  
0.847  
0.807 
NPA4 
The tourism product offered unique benefits to tourists.  
0.762  
0.698 
NPA5 
The tourism product performance met established 
standards better than the competition.  
0.850  
0.816 
Functional Benefits (FB) 
FB1 
The tourism products provided by tourism businesses 
provide excellence in service quality  
0.789  
0.786 
Ku (2020) 
FB2 
The tourism products from tourism businesses provide 
various benefits of membership service.  
0.909  
0.894 
FB3 
The tourism products tourism businesses provide are 
superior service quality of service centers.  
0.856  
0.840 
Positive User Experience (PUX) 
PUX1 
Tourists love tourism products because of their shape, 
design of artificial intelligence, and material qualities of 
the products.  
0.892  
0.883 
Yoon et al. (2020) 
PUX2 
Artificial intelligence services are easy to use and 
functionally simple in tourists’ life.  
0.801  
0.751 
PUX3 
Tourists cherish these artificial intelligence services 
because they are significant to them.  
0.855  
0.829 
PUX4 
Tourists like artificial intelligence services because they 
express their self-perception, energetic, explorative, and 
healthy  
0.838  
0.813 
PUX5 
Tourists gladly followed the artificial intelligence 
services’ design style to show their respect to the 
product’s members and its tradition  
0.868  
0.825 
Perceived Anthropomorphism (PA) 
PA1 
Artificial intelligence appears anthropomorphic voice.  
0.910  
0.881 
Lee and Chen (2022) 
Huang and Rust 
(2020) 
PA2 
Artificial intelligence displays anthropomorphic- 
friendly interactive services.  
0.944  
0.903 
PA3 
Artificial intelligence appears anthropomorphic 
appearance.  
0.883  
0.854 
PA4 
Artificial intelligence demonstrates anthropomorphic 
thinking.  
0.905  
0.782 
Satisfaction (SAT) 
SAT1 
Tourists are satisfied with their decision to purchase 
tourism products from the tourism business.  
0.888  
0.889 
Huang et al. (2018) 
SAT2 
Tourists’ choice to use our artificial intelligence service 
was a wise one  
0.889  
0.876 
SAT3 
Tourists are happy with their earlier decision to use the 
tourism business.  
0.838  
0.823 
SAT4 
Tourists found deciding which products to put in the 
shopping cart interesting.  
0.923  
0.912 
SAT5 
Several good options were available for tourists to 
choose between them from the tourism business.  
0.848  
0.848 
SAT6 
Tourists would purchase tourism products from the 
tourism business in the future.  
0.917  
0.906 
Continued Artificial Intelligence Service 
Usage Intention of Tourism Businesses. 
(CUI) 
CUI1 
Tourists intend to continue shopping with artificial 
intelligence support rather than discontinuing.  
0.889  
0.874 
Leung et al. (2022) 
CUI2 
Most tourists intend to continue shopping with artificial 
intelligence support instead of using any alternate 
means.  
0.822  
0.813 
CUI3 
Overall, Tourists continue to shop for the artificial 
intelligence service as much as possible.  
0.895  
0.890  
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
7
6. Study 2 
6.1. Method 
The data collected in April 2023 revealed that nearly 37.2% of the 
respondents were males, and more than 70% were below 41 years old. 
Among the participants, 47.7% belonged to restaurants, and 51.9% 
came from Hangzhou (Table 5). 
As indicated in Table 6, data from Year 2023 indicates satisfactory 
reliability and convergent validity for all construct items. Furthermore, 
the discriminant validity of the constructs was assessed. The AVE values 
for each construct were higher than the correlation coefficients with 
other constructs in the study model. 
In addition, as shown in Table 7, all HTMT values are below 0.9, 
indicating satisfactory discriminant validity (B.B. Xie, Gong et al., 2023; 
C.H. Xie, Gong et al., 2023). 
6.2. Results 
The hypothesis testing results for the data collected in 2023 are 
depicted in Fig. 3. All hypotheses are supported in terms of the main 
effects, except for the impact of artificial intelligence innovation on 
functional benefit. However, neither positive user experience nor 
perceived anthropomorphism yields a significant moderating effect. 
In addition, the results of the total data analysis for the years 2022 
and 2023 are presented in Fig. 4. All main effects were significant, 
supporting hypotheses H1 to H5. Artificial intelligence innovation and 
new product advantage positively and significantly influenced func­
tional benefits and new products. Functional benefits positively and 
significantly influenced satisfaction and continued artificial intelligence 
service usage intention, while satisfaction positively affected continued 
artificial intelligence service usage intention. The factor with the most 
significant impact on functional benefits was new product advantage, 
while satisfaction had a more substantial influence on continued artifi­
cial intelligence service usage intention. The explanatory variance (R- 
square) for the antecedents on the dependent variables was 55.1% for 
functional benefit, 36.4% for satisfaction, and 62.3% for continued 
artificial intelligence service usage intention. The moderating effects of 
positive user experience and perceived anthropomorphism were not 
supported, as the effects were negative. Therefore, hypotheses H6–H9 
are not supported. 
6.3. Control Variables 
This study also discusses the influence of control variables (CV). By 
comparing three models—one including only the theoretical variables, 
one including only the control variables separately, and one including 
both—the results summarized in Table 6 indicate that the control vari­
able accounts for a small fraction of the variance in continued AI service 
usage (6.6%). However, adding the theoretical variables increases the R- 
square value of continued artificial intelligence service usage by 50.5% 
(from 6.6% to 57.1%). In contrast, adding the control variables to the 
theoretical variables only results in a minimal increase of 0.9% in the R- 
square value of continued AI service usage (Table 8). 
Table 2 
Demographic characteristics of responding (2022 data for Study 1).  
Year 
2022/3 [N = 371]  
Number 
Percentage (%) 
Classified of 
Hotel  
164  
44.2 
Tourism Business 
Restaurant  
182  
49.1  
Travel Agencies  
25  
6.7 
Location 
Beijing  
85  
22.9  
Hangzhou  
161  
43.4  
Taipei  
60  
16.2  
Singapore  
65  
17.5 
GEN 
Male  
143  
38.5 
Female  
228  
61.5 
AGE 
Under 30 years  
5  
1.3 
31 −40 years  
141  
38.0 
41 −50 years  
119  
32.1 
51 −60 years  
93  
25.1 
Above 60 years  
13  
3.5 
POSITION 
CEO  
76  
20.5 
Manager  
121  
32.6 
Supervisor  
154  
41.5 
Officer  
20  
5.4 
EDUCATION 
High school  
18  
4.9 
College/University  
278  
74.9 
Graduate Institute  
75  
20.2  
1–5 years  
89  
24.0 
EXPERIENCES 
6–10 years  
98  
26.4  
Above 11 years  
184  
49.6  
Table 3 
Correlation among constructs and the square root of the AVE (2022 data for Study 1).   
Mean 
SD 
Cronbach’s Alpha 
Composite Reliability 
AVE 
AII 
CUI 
FB 
NPA 
PA 
PUX 
SAT 
AII  
3.464  
0.631  
0.853  
0.855  
0.695  
0.834             
CUI  
3.831  
0.65  
0.839  
0.852  
0.756  
0.495  
0.869           
FB  
3.726  
0.701  
0.807  
0.817  
0.723  
0.562  
0.675  
0.851         
NPA  
3.575  
0.697  
0.877  
0.888  
0.733  
0.678  
0.626  
0.717  
0.856       
PA  
3.769  
0.787  
0.943  
0.943  
0.814  
0.476  
0.758  
0.681  
0.611  
0.902     
PUX  
3.463  
0.716  
0.903  
0.911  
0.721  
0.509  
0.521  
0.557  
0.56  
0.581  
0.849   
SAT  
3.773  
0.679  
0.944  
0.946  
0.782  
0.361  
0.54  
0.465  
0.492  
0.53  
0.434  
0.884 
Note: 
1. The main diagonal shows the square of the AVE (averaged variance extracted). 
2. AII, Artificial Intelligence Innovation; NPA, New Product Advantage; FB, Functional Benefits; PUX, Positive User Experience; PA, Perceived Anthropomorphism; 
SAT, Satisfaction. CUI, Continued Artificial Intelligence Service Usage Intention of Tourism Businesses. 
Table 4 
Heterotrait-Monotrait ratio (2022 data for Study 1).   
AII 
CUI 
FB 
NPA 
PA 
PUX 
Artificial Intelligence 
Innovation             
Continued artificial 
intelligence service 
usage intention  
0.580           
Functional benefits  
0.675  
0.816         
New Product Advantage  
0.786  
0.722  
0.844       
Perceived 
Anthropomorphism  
0.530  
0.846  
0.782  
0.671     
Positive user Experience  
0.583  
0.590  
0.648  
0.636  
0.630   
Satisfaction  
0.403  
0.601  
0.530  
0.545  
0.561  
0.469 
Note: 
1. AII, Artificial Intelligence Innovation; NPA, New Product Advantage; FB, 
Functional benefits; PUX, Positive User Experience; PA, Perceived anthropo­
morphism; SAT, Satisfaction. CUI, Continued artificial intelligence service usage 
intention of tourism businesses. 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
8
7. Study 3 
7.1. Method 
In addition to conducting quantitative research, this study also 
employed enterprise interviews to enhance the validity of causal re­
lationships. Senior executives from Cowell Information Co., Ltd. 
<https://www.cowell.com.tw/> , a prominent information technology 
company based in Taiwan, and QbiAI Co. <https://ai3.cloud/> , a well- 
known AI company providing various solutions including system inte­
gration, customer service system, AI intelligent robot services, were 
interviewed as part of the research process. These interviews aimed to 
gain a deeper understanding of this study’s proposed research frame­
work and uncover meaningful insights and potential explanatory factors 
based on the quantitative research findings from the past two years. 
Established in 1989, Cowell Information has primarily served well- 
known travel agencies as its major clients and has experienced 
Fig. 2. Results of hypothesis testing (Study1: 2022 data)].  
Table 5 
Demographic characteristics of responding (2023 data for Study 2).  
Year 
2023/4 [N = 277]  
Number 
Percentage (%) 
Classified of 
Hotel  
94  
33.9 
Tourism Business 
Restaurant  
132  
47.7  
Travel Agencies  
51  
18.4 
Location 
Beijing  
98  
43.3  
Hangzhou  
118  
51.9  
Taipei  
38  
16.7  
Singapore  
23  
10.1 
GEN 
Male  
103  
37.2 
Female  
174  
62.8 
AGE 
Under 30 years  
11  
3.9 
31 −40 years  
187  
67.0 
41 −50 years  
61  
21.9 
51 −60 years  
9  
3.2 
Above 60 years  
9  
3.2 
POSITION 
CEO  
53  
19.1 
Manager  
67  
24.2 
Supervisor  
85  
30.7 
Officer  
72  
26.0 
EDUCATION 
High school  
8  
2.9 
College/University  
211  
76.2 
Graduate Institute  
58  
20.9  
1–5 years  
68  
24.5 
EXPERIENCES 
6–10 years  
80  
28.9  
Above 11 years  
129  
46.6  
Table 6 
Correlation among constructs and the square root of the AVE (2023 data for Study 2).   
Mean 
SD 
Cronbach’s 
Alpha 
Composite 
Reliability 
AVE 
AII 
CUI 
FB 
NPA 
PA 
PUX 
SAT 
AII  
3.600  
0.57  
0.816  
0.819  
0.643  
0.802             
CUI  
3.974  
0.564  
0.824  
0.836  
0.739  
0.430  
0.86           
FB  
3.883  
0.625  
0.779  
0.786  
0.695  
0.477  
0.56  
0.834         
NPA  
3.754  
0.596  
0.827  
0.84  
0.661  
0.609  
0.581  
0.683  
0.813       
PA  
3.961  
0.642  
0.904  
0.91  
0.723  
0.429  
0.69  
0.592  
0.566  
0.85     
PUX  
3.625  
0.656  
0.882  
0.896  
0.679  
0.43  
0.458  
0.484  
0.501  
0.516  
0.824   
SAT  
3.857  
0.634  
0.939  
0.941  
0.768  
0.436  
0.662  
0.527  
0.552  
0.631  
0.526  
0.876 
Note: 
1. The main diagonal shows the square of the AVE (averaged variance extracted). 
2. AII, Artificial Intelligence Innovation; NPA, New Product Advantage; FB, Functional benefits; PUX, Positive User Experience; PA, Perceived Anthropomorphism; 
SAT, Satisfaction. CUI, Continued Artificial Intelligence Service Usage Intention of Tourism Businesses. 
Table 7 
Heterotrait-Monotrait ratio (2023 data for Study 2).   
AII 
CUI 
FB 
NPA 
PA 
PUX 
Artificial Intelligence 
Innovation             
Continued Artificial 
Intelligence Service 
Usage Intention  
0.514           
Functional Benefits  
0.591  
0.698         
New Product Advantage  
0.741  
0.700  
0.845       
Perceived 
Anthropomorphism  
0.490  
0.790  
0.704  
0.654     
Positive User Experience  
0.509  
0.529  
0.576  
0.594  
0.579   
Satisfaction  
0.498  
0.745  
0.612  
0.632  
0.679  
0.577 
Note: 
1. AII, Artificial Intelligence Innovation; NPA, New Product Advantage; FB, 
Functional benefits; PUX, Positive User Experience; PA, Perceived anthropo­
morphism; SAT, Satisfaction. CUI, Continued Artificial Intelligence Service 
Usage Intention of Tourism Businesses. 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
9
substantial growth alongside more than 800 customer organizations 
over the past 33 years (Cowell Information, 2023). The company spe­
cializes in information system development, particularly travel agency 
ERP systems, and has become a leading choice and premier brand in this 
domain. In recent years, Cowell Information has allocated a significant 
budget to develop innovative system services, including online payment 
platforms, LINE AI marketing, and customer service chatbots. In addi­
tion, QbiAI was founded in 2018 and mainly provides “Intelligent 
Robot” and “Customer Service System” to help customers integrate the 
two products into existing enterprise systems. Through intelligent robots 
to solve repetitive problems and improve staff efficiency, as well as 
through the customer service system with CRM modules to create 
customer profiles, QbiAI helps enterprises improve service quality while 
enhancing customer brand loyalty. 
The researcher interviewed three experts, the general manager 
(Expert A) and marketing managers (Expert B) of Cowell Information, to 
gather potential explanations and opinions regarding the company’s AI- 
related products and processes. Besides, a marketing manager (Expert C) 
of QbiAI Co. was accepted for interviewing for our study, as indicated in 
Appendix 1. These interviews aimed to supplement the quantitative 
analysis results obtained in this study. The research framework’s causal 
relationships and overall research validity can be strengthened by 
leveraging the collection and analysis of quantitative data from two 
different periods and insights obtained through in-depth interviews. 
The expert interviews were conducted on September 1st and 
September 5th, 2023. The researchers visited the experts at their com­
panies in person to carry out the interviews. The interview questions 
were mainly based on the research framework and hypothesized causal 
relationships proposed in this study, as well as the quantitative analysis 
results obtained in Year 2022 and 2023. In addition, the interviews were 
audio recorded and subsequently transcribed verbatim. Two researchers 
then summarized and consolidated the key points from the interviews. 
7.2. Results 
7.2.1. The effects of artificial intelligence innovation and new product 
advantage on functional benefits 
Firstly, regarding the impact of AI innovation on functional benefits, 
the three experts believed that while existing AI innovations in the 
Fig. 3. Results of hypothesis testing (Study2:2023 data)].  
Fig. 4. Results of hypothesis testing (Combined)].  
Table 8 
Comparison of the Structural Models.  
Results 
Full 
model 
Control- 
variables only 
model 
Theoretical- 
variables only 
model 
Number of paths in the 
model 
11  
2  
9 
Number of significant paths 
in the model 
5  
0  
5 
Variance explained in firm 
performance (percent) 
57.1  
6.6  
56.2 
The theoretical variables 
explain additional 
variance 
57.1-6.6 = 50.5 (percent) 
The control variables 
explain additional 
variance 
57.1-56.2 = 0.9 (percent)  
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
10
tourism industry are still in the early stages, they have improved effi­
ciency in travel tourism processes and customer value. For example, 
Expert A mentioned: 
In addition to ERP systems, our company provides online payment and 
chatbot services. These capabilities have enhanced the service efficiency 
and quality for our customers. As long as enterprises input their databases 
into our system for training, our chatbots can provide answers based on 
users’ questions. For instance, previously, many of our customers had to 
use human customer service to answer consumer inquiries, many of which 
were repetitive and wide-ranging. Nevertheless, now, with the use of AI- 
enhanced chatbots with deep learning, our customers have found they 
can address the vast majority of consumer questions, and consumers also 
feel this service experience is quite good. 
Expert C also provided the following perspective: 
While current AI innovations in the tourism industry may outwardly focus 
on customer interactions, they also offer vital strategic planning capa­
bilities for companies behind the scenes. As an example, restaurant 
ordering systems and delivery robots can compile data on customer order 
history and robot delivery times over a service period. Applying big data 
analytics to these aggregated user preferences and behavioral insights 
allows strategic targeting of marketing campaigns tuned to demand. 
Although not visible to consumers directly, AI-enabled data collection and 
analysis fundamentally serves as an innovation for firms’ operational 
strategy and performance optimization. 
In summary, the expert feedback provides real-world examples of 
how fledgling AI applications drive quantifiable improvements in 
tourism sector efficiency, quality, planning, and customer experiences, 
validating the quantitative data on functional value creation. While 
further innovation is still needed, these results confirm AI innovation is 
moving in the right direction toward generating benefits, highlighting 
areas to focus on ongoing development. 
Secondly, regarding the impact of new product advantage on func­
tional benefits, the three experts also agreed that if the tourism industry 
can continuously launch innovations and make consumers feel their 
product quality is superior to competitors or provides unique benefits, it 
would naturally strengthen the functional benefits perceived by con­
sumers or travelers. For example, Expert B stated: 
New product advantage is inherently significant, and it is directly related 
to the benefits felt by customers. For instance, Luxury Travel Hackers’ 
travel booking platform collaborates with internet celebrities or travel 
KOLs to plan customized itineraries, attracting their fans to the platform 
to purchase travel packages. This kind of product advantage makes cus­
tomers feel it improves the equity or value they need (fans may want to 
travel abroad with the person they idolize or follow the itineraries rec­
ommended by KOLs). 
Expert C also mentioned: 
Our customers integrate our chatbots with their websites, Facebook, apps, 
and other systems, allowing users to obtain desired information through 
more conversational and direct interactions. For example, users can 
leverage the chatbot to inquire about room reservations, date changes, 
payment methods, pandemic-related policies, and measures, or even 
recommend sightseeing spots near the hotel. These capabilities differen­
tiate our customers’ products from competitors while also strengthening 
the service quality improvements and more user-friendly experience 
perceived by their consumers. 
Therefore, new product advantage helps strengthen users’ percep­
tion of the product having superior service quality performance, as well 
as providing more value to their membership benefits. The experts’ 
interview responses echo the relevant quantitative analysis results of 
this study. 
7.2.2. The Effects of functional benefits on satisfaction and continued 
artificial intelligence service usage intention 
Regarding the impact of functional benefits on tourist satisfaction 
and continued usage intention of AI services, the three experts believed 
that if consumers or tourists feel the products or services provided by 
restaurants or hotels can bring high value or benefits to them with the 
help of AI-enabled features, users would feel their decision was correct. 
Such positive feelings or experiences would also improve their attitude 
or evaluation of the company and even strengthen users’ intention to 
continue purchasing its products or services or even recommend them to 
more people. Expert C stated: 
Some restaurants now provide "food delivery robots" that consumers can 
order from by scanning a QR code on their table. Soon after, they see a 
cute delivery robot slowly moving from the kitchen to their table. It then 
says in an adorable voice, "Your order has arrived!" After the customer 
takes their meal and presses a confirmation button, the robot returns to 
the kitchen. This innovative service experience of AI food delivery robots, 
together with the fully autonomous online ordering process, genuinely 
enhances consumers’ overall satisfaction and dining experience with the 
restaurant. If I were the customer, I would want to keep returning to dine 
at this restaurant and continue enjoying such service. 
Expert A mentioned another example where AI robots can strengthen 
service experience: 
The hotel industry was severely impacted during the pandemic, forcing 
layoffs of some service staff, and causing labor shortages. Nevertheless, at 
the same time, some hotels in mainland China or Taiwan transformed into 
so-called "quarantine hotels." For instance, travelers returning to Taiwan 
from overseas must quarantine at a hotel for 10 to 14 days and test 
negative for COVID before being allowed to go home. Quarantine hotels 
used delivery robots to send meals and amenities during stays, avoiding 
excessive contact and infection risk. The application of such AI robots in 
hotels was well-received. 
Synthesizing the benefits and enhanced satisfaction described by 
Experts A and C regarding innovative AI robot services, as well as users’ 
intention to continue using such services, aligns with the quantitative 
analysis results from 2022 and 2023. The relevant hypotheses are thus 
supported. 
7.2.3. The moderating effects of positive user experience and perceived 
anthropomorphism 
First, regarding the moderating effect, positive user experience, the 
three experts also believed that the current AI innovations in the tourism 
industry are still limited, and therefore, based on the "positive user 
experience" defined in this study, their effects are minimal and cannot 
lead to decisive impact. As Expert A stated: 
You asked whether the current AI used in the industry can make con­
sumers or travelers feel it is easy to use. I think this is possible, but you also 
asked whether the current AI could make them like travel products more 
or even feel that the AI reflects their sense of exploration and health 
concepts; this would be difficult. Additionally, it is possible for AI to make 
travelers feel it can cater to their styles or preferences, but as I mentioned 
earlier, the AI currently used in the tourism industry is still at an early 
stage. To achieve such innovation is still premature. 
Moreover, although new product advantages can significantly 
strengthen users’ perceived functional benefits (main effect), due to the 
low level of AI service experience measured by "positive user experi­
ence", its influence on the relationship between positive user experience 
and functional benefits is negligible under such circumstances. Since 
Experts B and C’s opinions were similar to Expert A’s, synthesizing the 
quantitative analysis and expert interview results in this study, the 
moderating effect of "positive user experience" is thus not significant. 
Besides, regarding the moderating effect of perceived anthropo­
morphism, the experts also provided relevant perspectives. Overall, the 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
11
experts believe the level of anthropomorphism in current AI innovations 
in the tourism industry still needs to be improved. From the definition of 
anthropomorphism, AI services in the tourism industry need to make 
users feel there is a human-like appearance or personality, creating a 
human-computer interaction experience with human-like emotions or 
enthusiasm. However, the experts believe some processes or system 
functions may utilize AI algorithms to improve efficiency but do not 
necessarily make users perceive a human-like appearance or emotions. 
Moreover, physical service robots are more likely to evoke feelings of 
anthropomorphism in users, but for online or digital services, percep­
tions of anthropomorphism may be very low or negligible. Expert C 
expressed his viewpoint: 
I mentioned users can inquire about room reservations, date changes, 
payment methods, and pandemic regulations through our developed 
chatbot. However, this chatbot is just a dialog box without human-like 
appearance or emotions, similar to the popular ChatGPT, which pro­
vides possible answers based on prompts but is just an interactive dialog 
box. However, in the next stage, we can consider improving our chatbot to 
interact with travelers through a human-like interface on phones or 
computers. 
Regarding the moderating effect of anthropomorphism in 2022 and 
2023 from this study, Expert B provided relevant possible explanations: 
In 2022 during the COVID-19 pandemic, industries like hotels and res­
taurants heavily used apps and online services to interact with consumers 
and complete transactions. To retain customers, they proactively lever­
aged various AI innovations through apps for intensive customer in­
teractions, achieving noticeable effects. Although these online or robot 
services differed from real humans, due to the physical distancing during 
the pandemic where interactions were limited to phones or computers, 
users may still have felt a certain level of human-like service, enhancing 
the impact of functional benefits on satisfaction or attitudes (positive 
moderation effect). 
However, by 2023, many countries lifted pandemic restrictions and in­
teractions normalized, with travel rebounding and dine-in resuming. In 
this context, the AI innovations used are no longer considered "innovative" 
after widespread prior use. Moreover, from the definition of anthropo­
morphism, most AI services lack human-like appearance or enthusiasm/ 
emotions. Hence, in 2023, users will likely have different strong percep­
tions than when they first experienced AI services in 2022. 
Based on the experts’ conclusions, this study believes that for the 
2022 analysis, perceived anthropomorphism positively and significantly 
moderated the relationship between functional benefits and satisfaction. 
But for continued usage intention, the main effect is still substantive 
functional benefits since actual perceived anthropomorphism was low 
and did not have a decisive impact. Thus, for the functional benefits- 
continued AI usage intention relationship, the moderating effect is 
likely insignificant or negative. By the 2023 analysis, with lower 
anthropomorphism perceptions post-pandemic, anthropomorphism 
could not significantly moderate effects or even negatively impact 
relationships. 
8. Discussion 
Although the literature and practical studies frequently mention the 
numerous benefits of AI innovation for travelers in the process of 
selecting and purchasing goods, based on a two-year survey conducted 
across multiple countries in the tourism industry, this study reveals that 
the benefits derived from AI innovation are still limited, indicating that 
there is room for improvement. This study conducted in-depth in­
terviews with enterprises to better understand the extent of AI innova­
tion adoption in tourism businesses and recommends further research in 
this area. 
First, AI will significantly impact service innovation in tourism 
businesses and satisfy their consumers; the comprehensive data analysis 
of the two-year study indicates that all the main effects have a significant 
positive impact on the dependent variable. Both AI innovation and new 
product advantage significantly influence the functional benefits expe­
rienced by the respondents, with new product advantage having the 
most significant impact (Nayak et al., 2021). AI innovation has different 
impacts on the functional benefits of the tourism industry, and the in­
terviewees in this study believe that artificial intelligence innovation 
mainly focuses on improving operational efficiency and must be linked 
to improving organizational strategies and establishing strategic part­
nerships in the future. 
Second, based on AI intelligent service deep learning and neural 
network analysis methods, managers can continuously improve con­
sumers’ perceived functional benefits of AI through human-computer 
interaction; the respondents acknowledged that functional benefits 
enhance tourists’ satisfaction and intention to continue using AI ser­
vices. Strengthening the functional benefits of travel products implies 
better service quality for consumers, saving them time and effort and 
fostering the desire to continue using AI services in the future (Le et al., 
2023; Foroudi et al., 2020). However, none of the hypotheses related to 
moderation effects received support. Positive user experience does not 
significantly affect the relationship between AI innovation and func­
tional benefits, and positive user experience negatively influences the 
relationship between new product advantages and functional benefits. 
Moreover, perceived anthropomorphism does not significantly influence 
the relationship between functional benefits and satisfaction, but it 
negatively moderates the relationship between functional benefits and 
continued AI service usage intentions (Le et al., 2023; Foroudi et al., 
2020). 
8.1. Theoretical contributions and implications 
Using a socio-technical system, this study is the first to evaluate AI 
innovation and new product competitive advantage in the context of the 
tourism industry during the pandemic-induced changes in the internal 
and external environments of tourism businesses. The research high­
lights the significant role of AI innovation in socio-technical systems for 
tourism business innovation. However, the outcomes brought by this 
approach still require improvement. 
The provision of AI services alone is insufficient, as is evident from 
the research findings of this study. AI services focus primarily on 
improving products and planning processes for consumers. However, 
these improvements do not translate into enhancements in organiza­
tional strategies. In this case, the short-term impact of AI services on 
providing new product advantages and increasing perceived functional 
benefits for consumers will not contribute to long-term strategic inno­
vation within the organization or facilitate extended effects in product 
innovation or cross-industry collaborations. Therefore, consistent with 
previous research, innovation in information technology must align with 
corporate strategies. This alignment can lead to innovations in business 
models, expanded opportunities for cross-industry alliances, and the 
acquisition of more significant competitive advantages for organizations 
while simultaneously delivering more functional consumer benefits (El 
Sawy et al., 1999). 
Furthermore, the non-significant moderation effects indicate the 
limitations of the AI services currently employed by tourism businesses. 
Users’ perceptions of positive user experiences and anthropomorphism 
still need improvement and may result in adverse outcomes. Although 
previous studies have demonstrated the significant moderation effects of 
positive user experience and perceived anthropomorphism, in the 
context of this study, AI services are still in their early stages with 
limited applications. Additionally, the limited or insufficient transaction 
records of consumers from different tourism businesses contribute to 
users’ perceptions that the AI services offered do not provide tangible 
benefits. Therefore, these findings prompt existing tourism businesses to 
consider how to design AI services to maximize their strategic and 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
12
operational benefits. 
8.2. Implication for practice 
In terms of practical implications, this study highlights the signifi­
cant impact of both AI innovation and new product advantage on 
functional benefits, with new product advantage exerting a more sig­
nificant influence. Therefore, it is recommended that organizations 
prioritize the use of AI services to enhance consumer processes and the 
quality of purchased goods, enabling effective differentiation from 
competitors. Additionally, expanding AI services to cover the pre- 
purchase, during-purchase, and post-purchase stages can give con­
sumers a better perception of new product advantages. 
For instance, in the context of travelers’ itineraries, the subsequent 
step is to embark on an actual travel journey after making relevant 
product bookings. Travel agencies can leverage AI services to auto­
matically remind travelers to purchase travel insurance or promptly 
notify them of any changes in boarding gates during a trip, thereby 
avoiding missed boarding times. Additionally, real-time weather con­
ditions can be monitored at a traveler’s destination and provide timely 
reminders of potentially unforeseen circumstances. By strengthening AI 
services throughout these three travel journey stages, travelers can 
experience a higher degree of new product advantages and enhance 
their perceived functional benefits. 
Secondly, in terms of AI innovation, as mentioned above, the impact 
of AI innovation on organizational strategy and performance still needs 
to be improved. Accordingly, tourism businesses should consider inte­
grating AI service innovation with organizational strategies in the next 
stage to enhance their competitive advantage and product innovation, 
thereby providing consumers with more functional benefits; the appli­
cation of artificial intelligence has significantly contributed to hotel and 
restaurant services during the epidemic. In the future, as per experts’ 
suggestions from interviewers, examples such as ChatGPT and related 
plugins will serve as optimal paradigms. For instance, tourists can search 
for flights, accommodations, car rentals, and more based on their travel 
destinations. ChatGPT can utilize data from affiliated tourism businesses 
to provide tourists with the necessary information and connect them to 
the booking buttons of partner enterprises, thereby facilitating the 
completion of transactions. Similarly, tourism businesses can expand 
their organizational collaborations related to travel itineraries by 
exchanging product data and enriching each other’s databases. 
The use of innovative artificial intelligence services by tourism 
companies can create more innovative tourism products for both parties 
and further enhance the functional benefits of consumers. Furthermore, 
by providing superior functional benefits to tourists, tourism enterprises 
can positively influence customer satisfaction and create expectations 
among future customers to utilize the innovative AI services provided by 
these enterprises when relevant needs arise. 
Finally, although the hypothesized moderating effects of positive 
user experience and perceived anthropomorphism were not supported 
in this study and even yielded adverse effects, in-depth interviews 
identified potential reasons. These include the limited availability of 
data for training AI innovation services and the limited effect of 
anthropomorphism in existing AI systems used by tourism businesses. 
Considering these findings, tourism businesses should accumulate more 
data on consumer preferences and behaviors through their organiza­
tional efforts and by integrating external industry databases to train 
their AI systems. This will better align the AI innovation services pro­
vided with customer needs and enable precision marketing. 
Furthermore, advancements in generative AI, such as avatar gener­
ation websites like HeyGen or Movieo, continue to evolve. These ad­
vancements enable AI services of tourism businesses to provide more 
human-like experiences, with human-like appearances, movements, 
and multilingual conversation capabilities. 
Overall, these practical implications emphasize the need for tourism 
businesses to strategically leverage AI services to enhance functional 
benefits, integrate AI innovation with organizational strategies, and 
improve user experiences and perceived anthropomorphism to maxi­
mize the potential benefits of AI in the tourism industry. 
8.3. Limitations and Future Research Direction 
This study echoes the recommendations of Maier et al. (2023) and 
involves the collection and quantitative analysis of two annual samples 
from multiple countries. In addition, in-depth interviews were con­
ducted with significant tourism businesses in Taiwan to enhance the 
credibility and validity of the research framework. However, due to the 
early stages of AI services in tourism businesses, this study is subject to 
certain research limitations that can be addressed and improved in 
future related studies. 
The first limitation pertains to the study participants. The question­
naires were primarily distributed at the managerial level of tourism 
businesses to understand the impact of AI innovation services on orga­
nizational strategies, performance, and user perceptions. Although this 
study provides valuable insights and research implications, data were 
not collected from the perspectives of general users or tourists. This 
limitation arises from ascertaining whether the surveyed individuals had 
used AI innovation services from a specific tourism business, encom­
passing various types such as hotels, restaurants, and travel agencies. To 
overcome this limitation, future studies should collaborate with tourism 
businesses to distribute questionnaires directly to users and gain insights 
into their perceptions. 
The second limitation is associated with administering question­
naires over two years. The same organizations and respondents would 
not be guaranteed to be available for participation, and the years 2022 
and 2023 coincided with the severe impact and subsequent recovery 
from the COVID-19 pandemic, significantly affecting tourism businesses 
worldwide and leading to numerous closures. Despite efforts to 
distribute questionnaires across multiple countries over two consecutive 
years, it was only sometimes possible to receive responses from the same 
companies, ensuring optimal data collection conditions. While this does 
not undermine the credibility and validity of the data collected, future 
studies should strengthen the research framework’s credibility and 
causal relationships by collecting questionnaire data over multiple years 
from the same source. 
9. Conclusions 
This study presents empirical findings on the impact of AI innovation 
and new product advantage on functional benefits and continued AI 
service usage intention in the context of socio-technical systems and 
emotions. The results highlight the significance of AI innovation and 
new product advantages in enhancing functional benefits for travelers, 
leading to increased satisfaction and intention to continue using AI 
services. However, the proposed moderating effects of positive user 
experience and perceived anthropomorphism were not found to be 
significant. Nevertheless, in-depth interviews revealed that tourism 
businesses’ current AI innovation services have limitations and room for 
improvement. Therefore, further exploration and enhancements of AI 
innovation services are recommended. The research framework and 
strategic recommendations proposed in this study have the potential to 
contribute to the digital transformation and sustained competitive 
advantage of tourism businesses. 
The author’s statements 
The manuscript (Especially the revision) was conducted by Prof. 
Edward Ku and Prof. Chun-Der Chen; we list the main contribution as 
follows: Conceptual designs: Prof. Ku, Data collection: Prof. Ku, Data 
Analysis: Prof. Chen, Revised manuscript: Prof. Chen and Prof. Ku, Final 
Approved: Prof. Ku. 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
13
Declaration of Competing Interest 
No. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors thank the editor-in-chief and the two reviewers for their 
excellent guidance that significantly improved the manuscript. This 
research was supported by the National Science and Technology Council 
in Taiwan under contract number NSTC 112–2410-H-328 −004.  
Appendix 1. Qualitative Interviews Information 
1. Respondents.   
Company 
Position 
Working Experience 
Interview hours 
Cowell Information 
General Manager 
25 Years 
3 h 
Cowell Information 
Marketing Manager 
18 Years 
3 h 
QbiAI Co. 
Marketing Manager 
4 Years 
3 h  
2. Interview guides:  
• Q1: Recent AI innovation in the tourism industry  
• Q2: What kind of advantages and functional benefits do you think products or services enhanced by AI can bring to companies?  
• Q3: In what aspects do you think consumers can obtain satisfaction and contentment from products or services enhanced by AI in the tourism 
industry?  
• Q4: How do you think consumers will view these AI service innovations? In addition, what do you think about the anthropomorphizing of AI? How 
will consumers feel about it? What aspects will it impact?  
• Q5: Overall, are there any areas for improvement in the tourism industry’s current AI product or service innovations? How can they be improved? 
References 
Abou-Foul, M., Ruiz-Alba, J. L., & Lopez-Tenorio, P. J. (2023). The impact of artificial 
intelligence capabilities on servitization: The moderating role of absorptive capacity- 
A dynamic capabilities perspective (Article) Journal of Business Research, 157, Article 
113609. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.113609. 
Alalwan, A. A. (2020). Mobile food ordering apps: An empirical study of the factors 
affecting customer e-satisfaction and continued intention to reuse. International 
Journal of Information Management, 50, 28–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijinfomgt.2019.04.008 
Allal-Cherif, O. (2022). Intelligent cathedrals: Using augmented reality, virtual reality, 
and artificial intelligence to provide an intense cultural, historical, and religious 
visitor experience (Article) Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 178, Article 
121604. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.121604. 
Bedue, P., & Fritzsche, A. (2022). Can we trust AI? An empirical investigation of trust 
requirements and guide to successful AI adoption. Journal of Enterprise Information 
Management, 35(2), 530–549. https://doi.org/10.1108/jeim-06-2020-0233 
Ben Yahia, N., Eljaoued, W., Ben Saoud, N. B., & Colomo-Palacios, R. (2021). Towards 
sustainable collaborative networks for smart cities co-governance (Article) 
International Journal of Information Management, 56, Article 102037. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.11.005. 
Bencsik, B., Palmie, M., Parida, V., Wincent, J., & Gassmann, O. (2023). Business models 
for digital sustainability: Framework, microfoundations of value capture, and 
empirical evidence from 130 smart city services (Article) Journal of Business 
Research, 160, Article 113757. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2023.113757. 
Benitez, J., Castillo, A., Llorens, J., & Braojos, J. (2018). IT-enabled knowledge 
ambidexterity and innovation performance in small US firms: The moderator role of 
social media capability. Information & Management, 55(1), 131–143. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.im.2017.09.004 
Binesh, F., & Baloglu, S. (2023). Are we ready for hotel robots after the pandemic? A 
profile analysis (Article) Computers in Human Behavior, 147, Article 107854. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2023.107854. 
Chen, S. Y., Wei, H. Y., Ran, Y. X., Li, Q., & Meng, L. (2021). Waiting for a download: The 
effect of congruency between anthropomorphic cues and shopping motivation on 
consumer patience. Psychology & Marketing, 38(12), 2327–2338. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/mar.21564 
Diaz, E., Esteban, A., Koutra, C., Almeida, S., & Carranza, R. (2023). Co-creation of value 
in smart ecosystems: Past trends and future directions in tourism literature. Journal 
of Hospitality and Tourism Technology, 14(3), 365–383. https://doi.org/10.1108/jhtt- 
04-2021-0122 
Dwivedi, Y. K., Balakrishnan, J., Baabdullah, A. M., & Das, R. (2023). Do chatbots 
establish "humanness" in the customer purchase journey? An investigation through 
explanatory sequential design. Psychology & Marketing. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
mar.21888 
Dwivedi, Y. K., Hughes, L., Ismagilova, E., Aarts, G., Coombs, C., Crick, T., Duan, Y. Q., 
Dwivedi, R., Edwards, J., Eirug, A., Galanos, V., Ilavarasan, P. V., Janssen, M., 
Jones, P., Kar, A. K., Kizgin, H., Kronemann, B., Lal, B., Lucini, B., & Williams, M. D. 
(2021). Artificial Intelligence (AI): Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging 
challenges, opportunities, and agenda for research, practice and policy (Article) 
International Journal of Information Management, 57, Article 101994. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.08.002. 
El Sawy, O. A., Malhotra, A., Gosain, S., & Young, K. M. (1999). IT-intensive value 
innovation in the electronic economy: Insights from Marshall industries. MIS 
Quarterly, 23(3), 305–335. https://doi.org/10.2307/249466 
Elkhwesky, Z., & Elkhwesky, E. F. Y. (2023). A systematic and critical review of Internet 
of Things in contemporary hospitality: A roadmap and avenues for future research. 
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 35(2), 533–562. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/ijchm-01-2022-0090 
Foroudi, P., Cuomo, M. T., & Foroudi, M. M. (2020). Continuance interaction intention in 
retailing Relations between customer values, satisfaction, loyalty, and identification. 
Information Technology & People, 33(4), 1303–1326. https://doi.org/10.1108/itp-09- 
2018-0421 
Fraccastoro, S., Gabrielsson, M., & Pullins, E. B. (2021). The integrated use of social 
media, digital, and traditional communication tools in the B2B sales process of 
international SMEs (Article) International Business Review, 30(4), Article 101776. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2020.101776. 
Guan, C. H., Tan, M. J., & Peiser, R. (2021). Spatiotemporal effects of proximity to metro 
extension on housing price dynamics in Manhattan. Journal of Transport and Land 
Use, 14(1), 1295–1315. https://doi.org/10.5198/jtlu.2021.1915 
Gunay, A., Yargin, G. T., Suner-Pla-Cerda, S., & Kulaksiz, M. (2022). ’How should my 
family assistant be?’: initial perceptions about prospective and anticipated use of in- 
home virtual assistants in an emerging context. Behaviour & Information Technology. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929x.2022.2054357 
Hradecky, D., Kennell, J., Cai, W. J., & Davidson, R. (2022). Organizational readiness to 
adopt artificial intelligence in the exhibition sector in Western Europe (Article) 
International Journal of Information Management, 65, Article 102497. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2022.102497. 
Hsu, W. C., & Lee, M. H. (2023). Semantic Technology and Anthropomorphism: 
Exploring the Impacts of Voice Assistant Personality on User Trust, Perceived Risk, 
and Attitude. Journal of Global Information Management, 31(1). https://doi.org/ 
10.4018/jgim.318661 
Huang, G. H., Korfiatis, N., & Chang, C. T. (2018). Mobile shopping cart abandonment: 
The roles of conflicts, ambivalence, and hesitation. Journal of Business Research, 85, 
165–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.12.008 
Huang, H. Y., Ku, E. C. S., & Chen, C. D. (2022). Cloud infrastructure enhancing product 
competitive advantage of tourism SMEs on online consumption values of tourists. 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
14
Business Process Management Journal, 28(4), 1146–1163. https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
bpmj-05-2022-0246 
Jiang, J. X., Ellis, G. D., Ettekal, A. V., & Nelson, C. (2022). Situational engagement 
experiences: Measurement options and theory testing. Journal of Business Research, 
150, 223–236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.05.064 
Jo, H., & Hi, Bixby (2023). Determinants of goal-congruent usage and goal-congruent 
outcome in the artificial intelligence personal assistant context. Journal of 
Information Science. https://doi.org/10.1177/01655515231161554 
Jung, Y., & Park, J. (2018). An investigation of relationships among privacy concerns, 
affective responses, and coping behaviors in location-based services. International 
Journal of Information Management, 43, 15–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijinfomgt.2018.05.007 
Kan, T. C., Ku, E. C. S., Sun, W. C. W., Lai, T. C., Hsu, P. Y., & Hsu, S. C. (2023). Wellness 
tourism enhances elderly life satisfaction. Journal of Quality Assurance in Hospitality 
& Tourism. https://doi.org/10.1080/1528008x.2022.2052394 
Karampournioti, E., & Wiedmann, K. P. (2021). Storytelling in online shops: The impacts 
on explicit and implicit user experience, brand perceptions and behavioral intention. 
Internet Research, 32(7), 228–259. https://doi.org/10.1108/intr-09-2019-0377 
Kaya, F., Aydin, F., Schepman, A., Rodway, P., Yetisensoy, O., & Kaya, M. D. (2022). The 
roles of personality traits, AI anxiety, and demographic factors in attitudes toward 
artificial intelligence. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2151730 
Khan, S., & Abbas, M. (2023). Interactive effects of consumers’ ethical beliefs and 
authenticity on ethical consumption and pro-environmental behaviors (Article) 
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 71, Article 103226. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jretconser.2022.103226. 
Kim, M. J., Hall, C. M., Kwon, O., & Sohn, K. (2023). Effects of Value-Belief-Norm 
Theory, ESG, and AI on Space Tourist Behavior for Sustainability With Three Types 
of Space Tourism. Journal of Travel Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
00472875231191514 
Kim, M. J., Lee, C. K., & Bonn, M. (2017). Obtaining a better understanding about travel- 
related purchase intentions among senior users of mobile social network sites. 
International Journal of Information Management, 37(5), 484–496. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.04.006 
Krakowski, S., Luger, J., & Raisch, S. (2022). Artificial intelligence and the changing 
sources of competitive advantage. Strategic Management Journal, 44(6), 1425–1452. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.3387 
Ku, E. C. S. (2020). Spreading distinctive insignia benefits from mobile service: Evidence 
from a mobile application of transportation. Transportation Planning and Technology, 
43(7), 651–669. https://doi.org/10.1080/03081060.2020.1805542 
Ku, E. C. S. (2022). Developing business process agility: Evidence from inter- 
organizational information systems of airlines and travel agencies (Article) Journal of 
Air Transport Management, 103, Article 102247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jairtraman.2022.102247. 
Kumar, P., Sharma, S. K., & Dutot, V. (2023). Artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled CRM 
capability in healthcare: The impact on service innovation (Article) International 
Journal of Information Management, 69, Article 102598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijinfomgt.2022.102598. 
Lalicic, L., & Weismayer, C. (2021). Consumers’ reasons and perceived value co-creation 
of using artificial intelligence-enabled travel service agents. Journal of Business 
Research, 129, 891–901. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.11.005 
Le, N. H., Mai, M. Q. T., & Pham, T. A. (2023). Understanding how mindfulness sustains 
customer cocreation effort and transforms service value to well-being. Journal of 
Services Marketing, 37(2), 248–260. https://doi.org/10.1108/jsm-03-2022-0107 
Leung, W. K. S., Chang, M. K., Cheung, M. L., & Shi, S. (2022). Understanding consumers’ 
post-consumption behaviors in C2C social commerce: The role of functional and 
relational customer orientation. Internet Research, 32(4), 1131–1167. https://doi. 
org/10.1108/intr-11-2020-0664 
Li, B., Liu, L. N., Mao, W. C., Qu, Y. C. M., & Chen, Y. H. (2023). Voice artificial 
intelligence service failure and customer complaint behavior: The mediation effect of 
customer emotion (Article) Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 59, Article 
101261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2023.101261. 
Li, L., Lee, K. Y., Emokpae, E., & Yang, S. B. (2021). What makes you continuously use 
chatbot services? Evidence from chinese online travel agencies. Electronic Markets, 
31(3), 575–599. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-020-00454-z 
Li, Q., & Zhang, Y. (2022). Design and Implementation of Smart Tourism Service 
Platform from the Perspective of Artificial Intelligence (Article) Wireless 
Communications & Mobile Computing, 2022, Article 3501003. https://doi.org/ 
10.1155/2022/3501003. 
Li, Y., Wang, C. L., & Song, B. (2023). Customer acceptance of service robots under 
different service settings. Journal of Service Theory and Practice, 33(1), 46–71. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/jstp-06-2022-0127 
Liang, H. G., Saraf, N., Hu, Q., & Xue, Y. J. (2007). Assimilation of enterprise systems: 
The effect of institutional pressures and the mediating role of top management. MIS 
Quarterly, 31(1), 59–87. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148781 
Lv, X. Y., Yang, Y. F., Qin, D. Z., Cao, X. P., & Xu, H. (2022). Artificial intelligence service 
recovery: The role of empathic response in hospitality customers’ continuous usage 
intention (Article) Computers in Human Behavior, 126, Article 106993. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106993. 
Maier, C., Thatcher, J. B., Grover, V., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2023). Cross-sectional research: A 
critical perspective, use cases, and recommendations for IS research (Article) 
International Journal of Information Management, 70, Article 102625. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.102625. 
McLean, G., Osei-Frimpong, K., & Barhorst, J. (2021). Alexa, do voice assistants influence 
consumer brand engagement? - Examining the role of AI powered voice assistants in 
influencing consumer brand engagement. Journal of Business Research, 124, 312–328. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.11.045 
Miao, Z. Y. (2020). The influence factors of psychological understanding and behavior 
choice for legal industry entrepreneurs based on artificial intelligence technology 
(Article) Frontiers in Psychology, 11, Article 1615. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fpsyg.2020.01615. 
Monteiro, P., & Adler, P. S. (2022). Bureaucracy for the 21st century: Clarifying and 
expanding our view of bureaucratic organization. Academy of Management Annals, 16 
(2), 427–475. https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2019.0059 
Nam, K., Dutt, C. S., Chathoth, P., Daghfous, A., & Khan, M. S. (2021). The adoption of 
artificial intelligence and robotics in the hotel industry: Prospects and challenges. 
Electronic Markets, 31(3), 553–574. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-020-00442-3 
Nayak, B., Bhattacharyya, S. S., & Krishnamoorthy, B. (2021). Explicating the role of 
emerging technologies and firm capabilities towards attainment of competitive 
advantage in health insurance service firms (Article) Technological Forecasting and 
Social Change, 170, Article 120892. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2021.120892. 
Nilashi, M., Abumalloh, R. A., Samad, S., Alrizq, M., Alyami, S., Abosaq, H., 
Alghamdi, A., & Akib, N. A. M. (2022). Factors impacting customer purchase 
intention of smart home security systems: Social data analysis using machine 
learning techniques (Article) Technology in Society, 71, Article 102118. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2022.102118. 
Park, D., & Namkung, K. (2021). Exploring Users’ Mental Models for Anthropomorphized 
Voice Assistants through Psychological Approaches (Article) Applied Sciences-Basel, 
11(23), Article 11147. https://doi.org/10.3390/a. 
Paul, J., Alhassan, I., Binsaif, N., & Singh, P. (2023). Digital entrepreneurship research: A 
systematic review (Article) Journal of Business Research, 156, Article 113507. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.113507. 
Pelau, C., Dabija, D. C., & Ene, I. (2021). What makes an AI device human-like? The role 
of interaction quality, empathy and perceived psychological anthropomorphic 
characteristics in the acceptance of artificial intelligence in the service industry 
(Article) Computers in Human Behavior, 122, Article 106855. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chb.2021.106855. 
Pitakaso, R., Nanthasamroeng, N., Gonwirat, S., Khonjun, S., Kaewta, C., Srichok, T., & 
Dinkoksung, S. (2023). Designing safety-oriented tourist routes for heterogeneous 
tourist groups using an artificial multi-intelligence system. Journal of Industrial and 
Production Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2023.2248144 
Priya, B., & Sharma, V. (2023). Exploring users’ adoption intentions of intelligent virtual 
assistants in financial services: An anthropomorphic perspectives and socio- 
psychological perspectives (Article) Computers in Human Behavior, 148, Article 
107912. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2023.107912. 
Radhakrishnan, J., Gupta, S., & Prashar, S. (2022). Understanding organizations? 
Artificial intelligence journey: A qualitative approach. Pacific Asia Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems, 14(6), 43–77. https://doi.org/10.17705/ 
1pais.14602 
Rasheed, H. M. W., He, Y. Q., Khizar, H. M. U., & Abbas, H. S. M. (2023). Exploring 
Consumer-Robot interaction in the hospitality sector: Unpacking the reasons for 
adoption (or resistance) to artificial intelligence (Article) Technological Forecasting 
and Social Change, 192, Article 122555. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2023.122555. 
Schuhbert, A., Thees, H., & Pechlaner, H. (2023). Deep and organizational learning as 
innovation catalyzer in digital business ecosystems - a scenario analysis on the 
tourism destination Berlin. European Journal of Innovation Management. https://doi. 
org/10.1108/ejim-08-2022-0448 
Serrano, L., Ariza-Montes, A., Nader, M., Sianes, A., & Law, R. (2021). Exploring 
preferences and sustainable attitudes of Airbnb green users in the review comments 
and ratings: A text mining approach. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 29(7), 
1134–1152. https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2020.1838529 
Shuqair, S., Pinto, D. C., Cruz-Jesus, F., Mattila, A. S., Guerreiro, P. D., & So, K. K. F. 
(2022). Can customer relationships backfire? How relationship norms shape moral 
obligation in cancelation behavior. Journal of Business Research, 151, 463–472. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.07.008 
Sigalat-Signes, E., Calvo-Palomares, R., Roig-Merino, B., & Garcia-Adan, I. (2020). 
Transition towards a tourist innovation model: The smart tourism destination Reality 
or territorial marketing? Journal of Innovation & Knowledge, 5(2), 96–104. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jik.2019.06.002 
Spatola, N., & Wudarczyk, O. A. (2021). Ascribing emotions to robots: Explicit and 
implicit attribution of emotions and perceived robot anthropomorphism (Article) 
Computers in Human Behavior, 124, Article 106934. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chb.2021.106934. 
Suder, M., Duda, J., Kusa, R., & Mora-Cruz, A. (2022). At the crossroad of digital and 
tourism entrepreneurship: Mediating effect of digitalization in hospitality industry. 
European Journal of Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/ejim-08-2022- 
0422 
Sun, J. N., Dushime, H., & Zhu, A. D. (2022). Beyond beauty: A qualitative exploration of 
authenticity and its impacts on Chinese consumers’ purchase intention in live 
commerce (Article) Frontiers in Psychology, 13, Article 944607. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.944607. 
Sun, Y., Xu, X. B., Yu, H. Q., & Wang, H. C. (2022). Impact of value co-creation in the 
artificial intelligence innovation ecosystem on competitive advantage and 
innovation intelligibility. Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 39(3), 474–488. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/sres.2860 
Suryani, T., Fauzi, A., Sheng, M. L., & Nurhadi, M. (2022). Developing and testing a 
measurement scale for SMEs’ website quality (SMEs-WebQ): Evidence from 
Indonesia. Electronic Commerce Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10660-022- 
09536-w 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


International Journal of Information Management 76 (2024) 102757
15
Thumrongvut, P., Sethanan, K., Pitakaso, R., Jamrus, T., & Golinska-Dawson, P. (2022). 
Application of Industry 3.5 approach for planning of more sustainable supply chain 
operations for tourism service providers. International Journal of Logistics-Research 
and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1080/13675567.2022.2090529 
Tojib, D., Ho, T. H., Tsarenko, Y., & Pentina, I. (2022). Service robots or human staff? The 
role of performance goal orientation in service robot adoption (Article) Computers in 
Human Behavior, 134, Article 107339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2022.107339. 
Tong, L., Yan, W., & Manta, O. (2022). Artificial intelligence influences intelligent 
automation in tourism: A mediating role of internet of things and environmental, 
social, and governance investment (Article) Frontiers in Environmental Science, 10, 
Article 853302. https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2022.853302. 
Trevlopoulos, N. S., Tsalis, T. A., Evangelinos, K. I., Vatalis, K. I., & Nikolaou, I. E. (2023). 
The Role of Environmental Regulatory- and Proactive-Driven Corporate Strategy in 
Creating Corporate Green Intellectual Capital (GIC) and Environmental Innovation 
(EI). Journal of the Knowledge Economy. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-023-01148- 
5 
Wang, L., Dilanchiev, A., & Haseeb, M. (2022). The environmental regulation and policy 
assessment effect on the road to green recovery transformation. Economic Analysis 
and Policy, 76, 914–929. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eap.2022.10.006 
Wang, N. (2022). Application of DASH client optimization and artificial intelligence in 
the management and operation of big data tourism hotels. Alexandria Engineering 
Journal, 61(1), 81–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2021.04.080 
Wang, N., Zheng, W. J., & Zhang, W. B. (2023). Management emotion and firm’s 
strategic IT investment propensity. Journal of Computer Information Systems. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/08874417.2023.2222085 
Waqar, A., Othman, I., Shafiq, N., & Mansoor, M. S. (2023). Applications of AI in oil and 
gas projects towards sustainable development: A systematic literature review. 
Artificial Intelligence Review. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10467-7 
Wong, L. W., Tan, G. W. H., Ooi, K. B., & Dwivedi, Y. (2023). The role of institutional and 
self in the formation of trust in artificial intelligence technologies. Internet Research. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/intr-07-2021-0446 
Xie, B. B., Song, J., Shao, L. Y., Wu, S. H., Wei, X. P., Yang, B. S., Lin, H., Xie, J., & Su, J. S. 
(2023). From statistical methods to deep learning, automatic keyphrase prediction: 
A survey (Article) Information Processing & Management, 60(4), Article 103382. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2023.103382. 
Xie, C. H., Gong, Y. M., Xu, X. H., Chiang, C. Y., & Chen, Q. (2023). The influence of 
return channel type on the relationship between return service quality and customer 
loyalty in omnichannel retailing. Journal of Enterprise Information Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/jeim-02-2021-0073 
Yang, C., & Hu, J. (2022). When do consumers prefer AI-enabled customer service? The 
interaction effect of brand personality and service provision type on brand attitudes 
and purchase intentions. Journal of Brand Management, 29(2), 167–189. https://doi. 
org/10.1057/s41262-021-00261-7 
Yang, S. F., Ma, D., Shen, Z. Y., Wen, L., & Dong, L. (2023). The impact of artificial 
intelligence industry agglomeration on economic complexity. Economic Research- 
Ekonomska Istrazivanja, 36(1), 1420–1448. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
1331677x.2022.2089194 
Yoon, J., Kim, C., & Kang, R. (2020). Positive USer Experience over Product Usage Life 
Cycle and the Influence of Demographic Factors. International Journal of Design, 14 
(2), 85–102. 
Yuk, H., & Garrett, T. C. (2023). Does customer participation moderate the effects of 
innovation on cost-based financial performance? An examination of different forms 
of customer participation (Article) Journal of Business Research, 156, Article 113479. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.113479. 
Zaragoza-Saez, P., Marco-Lajara, B., & Ubeda-Garcia, M. (2022). A study from the Next 
Tourism Generation (NTG) Alliance. Measuring Business Excellence, 26(1), 106–121. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/mbe-11-2020-0151 
Zhang, A. D., & Rau, P. L. P. (2023). Tools or peers? Impacts of anthropomorphism level 
and social role on emotional attachment and disclosure tendency towards intelligent 
agents (Article) Computers in Human Behavior, 138, Article 107415. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chb.2022.107415. 
Zhang, B. Z., Ashta, A., & Barton, M. E. (2021). Do FinTech and financial incumbents 
have different experiences and perspectives on the adoption of artificial intelligence? 
Strategic Change-Briefings in Entrepreneurial Finance, 30(3), 223–234. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/jsc.2405 
Zhang, J., Zhang, L. H., & Ma, B. (2023). Ride-sharing platforms: The effects of online 
social interactions on loyalty, mediated by perceived benefits. Journal of Research in 
Interactive Marketing. https://doi.org/10.1108/jrim-01-2022-0012 
Zhou, S. S., Li, T. T., Yang, S. Q., & Chen, Y. A. (2022). What drives consumers’ purchase 
intention of online paid knowledge? A stimulus-organism-response perspective. 
(Article) Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 52, Article 101126. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2022.101126. 
E.C.S. Ku and C.-D. Chen                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


