# 3. 연구논문_PhiUSIIL A diverse security profile empowered phishing URL detection framework based on similarity index and incremental learning

---
**Source:** [[3. 연구논문_PhiUSIIL A diverse security profile empowered phishing URL detection framework based on similarity index and incremental learning.pdf]]
**Category:** #mba #ai
**Imported:** 2026-03-05

Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
Available online 20 October 2023
0167-4048/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers & Security
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose
PhiUSIIL: A diverse security proﬁle empowered phishing URL detection 
framework based on similarity index and incremental learning
Arvind Prasad ∗, Shalini Chandra
Department of Computer Science, BBA University, Lucknow, India
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
A B S T R A C T
Keywords:
Phishing URL detection
PhiUSIIL phishing dataset
Similarity index
Incremental learning
Cybersecurity
With the proliferation of the World Wide Web and the increasing sophistication of cyber threats, phishing attacks 
have emerged as a signiﬁcant concern for individuals and organizations alike. Phishing attacks, commonly 
executed through deceptive URLs, aim to deceive users into divulging sensitive information, leading to ﬁnancial 
loss, identity theft, or compromising sensitive data. It continues to pose a signiﬁcant threat to individuals and 
organizations in today’s digital landscape, necessitating the development of eﬀective and eﬃcient detection 
frameworks. This article presents PhiUSIIL, a Phishing URL detection framework based on Similarity Index 
and Incremental Learning. The similarity index helps eﬀectively identify visual similarity-based attacks such 
as zero-width characters, homograph, punycode, homophone, bit squatting, and combosquatting attacks. The 
incremental learning approach allows the framework to continuously update its knowledge base with new 
data. Further, implementing diverse security proﬁles accommodates diverse security requirements of users or 
organizations. PhiUSIIL extracts URL features, downloads the webpage from URL to extract HTML features, and 
derives new features from existing information to construct a phishing URL dataset, named PhiUSIIL phishing 
URL dataset, encompassing 134850 legitimate and 100945 phishing URLs. The proposed phishing URL detection 
framework has extensively experimented with the PhiUSIIL phishing URL dataset. The constructed dataset helps 
to improve the detection accuracy when used during pre-training approach. PhiUSIIL achieved an accuracy of 
99.24% when experimented with a fully incremental training approach and 99.79% when experimented with 
a pre-training approach. The experimental results show its eﬀectiveness and ensure the framework remains 
eﬀective and up-to-date against emerging and sophisticated phishing techniques.
1. Introduction
The exponential growth of the Internet and Internet-enabled devices 
have revolutionized the way we access online services such as educa-
tion, ﬁnance, and healthcare. The continuous development of digital 
technologies, such as high-speed Internet, more friendly Internet access 
devices, and cloud services, enhances the end-user experience daily. 
As a result, the rapidly evolving interconnected digital landscape has 
made online activities an integral part of our daily lives. Furthermore, 
the pandemic caused by COVID-19 played a pivotal role in driving 
digital transformation and triggered a massive shift of businesses and 
services from oﬄine to online to minimize physical interactions (Nurhas 
et al., 2022). The pandemic compelled all organizations, industries, gov-
ernments, and individuals to rapidly adopt digital transformation to 
ensure continuity during uncertainty. Digital transformation presents 
new avenues for growth and is key to success in the increasingly inter-
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: arvindbitm@gmail.com (A. Prasad).
connected digital world. However, while technological advancements 
oﬀer tremendous opportunities, they also bring forth a surge in cyber 
threats that cannot be ignored (Kävrestad et al., 2022). The rapid pro-
liferation of interconnected internet-enabled devices such as laptops, 
mobiles, smart gadgets, smart home appliances, and smart cars has cre-
ated an expansive attack surface, leading to an alarming upswing in 
sophisticated cyberattacks (Shih et al., 2023).
Phishing, a prevalent cyberattack, poses a signiﬁcant threat to indi-
viduals, organizations, and society. It typically involves deceptive tac-
tics, such as fraudulent URLs, aimed at tricking unsuspecting users into 
revealing sensitive information, including passwords, ﬁnancial details, 
or personal data. URL visual similarity-based attacks such as zero-width 
characters, homograph, punycode, homophone, bit squatting, and com-
bosquatting attacks are techniques cyber criminals use to create fraud-
ulent websites that closely resemble legitimate ones (Sahingoz et al., 
2019). While each attack has its technical nuances, they all exploit 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103545
Received 26 June 2023; Received in revised form 10 October 2023; Accepted 16 October 2023


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
2
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Fig. 1. Increase in phishing URL attacks post pandemic. (For interpretation of the colors in the ﬁgure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
human error, visual similarity, or typo mistakes to deceive users into 
visiting phishing websites that often mimic legitimate ones.
Cybercriminals often use subdomain spooﬁng techniques by creating 
a subdomain resembling a legitimate website to convince users they are 
accessing a legitimate website (Marooﬁ et al., 2021). Malicious actors 
can use transposition to swap adjacent characters in a domain name 
to create a visually similar but phishing website. Top-level domains 
(TLDs), the last segment of a domain name, are extensively used by ma-
licious actors to create a domain using a TLD that resembles well-known 
and trusted extensions to trick users into visiting fake websites (Anon, 
2023a). The newly released TLDs .zip and .mov have allowed cyber-
criminals to register a domain resembling well-known ﬁle extensions. 
Sending such domain names could deceive users into thinking they 
are downloading a harmless ﬁle when, in reality, it is a phishing URL. 
Within a few days after the release of .zip and .mov TLDs, cybercrim-
inals have already registered many phishing domains (Anon, 2023b). 
Phishers often use TLDs that closely resemble well-known brands or 
trusted entities to trick users into believing they are visiting legitimate 
websites.
The exponential growth of URL phishing attacks has become in-
creasingly evident in recent years. We collected the last ﬁfteen years’ 
phishing URLs and email data from the Anti-Phishing Working Group 
(APWG) (Anon, 2023c) and plotted a graph in Fig. 1. The graph shows 
that the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to an immense in-
crease in phishing URL attacks. Cybercriminals exploit the fear, height-
ened emotions, uncertainty, medical urgency, increased online activity, 
and information-seeking behavior of individuals during times of crisis. 
Fig. 1 shows that the growth of phishing URL attacks is at an alarming 
rate after the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ensuring online security is paramount in the digital age, where 
the Internet has become integral to our daily lives. The consequences 
of phishing attack can be dire, ranging from compromising sensitive 
data to ﬁnancial loss (Wen et al., 2023). The exponential growth of 
URL phishing attacks necessitates robust and eﬀective defense mech-
anisms to counter these threats. Unfortunately, traditional rule-based 
approaches fail to combat the evolving tactics employed by cybercrim-
inals. Machine learning has emerged as a powerful tool in the battle 
against various cyberattacks (Zhang et al., 2017; Prasad and Chandra, 
2022a; Unal et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2021). It has the ability to analyze 
vast amounts of data and identify patterns that are indicative of phish-
ing URLs (Prasad and Chandra, 2022b; Bountakas and Xenakis, 2023; 
Rupa et al., 2021).
Phishing attacks constantly evolve, and new attack techniques and 
patterns emerge regularly. It is crucial to keep the machine learning 
model updated by training them with new data to improve model adapt-
ability, accuracy, and real-time detection. Classical machine learning 
algorithms require periodic retraining on the entire dataset (includ-
ing existing and newly collected data) to incorporate changes. When 
enough new and unseen data is collected, the classical machine learn-
ing model must be retrained from scratch to prevent excessive model 
staleness (Prapas et al., 2021). Retraining brings scalability issues as we 
need to store the entire training dataset continuously. As the dataset 
grows, it needs more reprocessing to train the model on the growing 
dataset.
The proposed machine learning-based phishing URL detection ap-
proach is based on incremental learning. Incremental learning is a ma-
chine learning technique where a model can continuously learn from 
new data, reducing the need for full retraining and minimizing the dis-
ruption caused by the retraining process. While the limitation of batch 
learning is its dependence on retraining the entire dataset whenever 
new data is introduced, this process can be computationally expensive 
and time-consuming, making it less suitable for dynamic environments. 
Incremental learning enables a model to continuously adapt and im-
prove its performance by continuous training whenever it receives new 
data rather than starting from scratch every time it gets new data (Pur-
wanto et al., 2022; Huang and Ma, 2023). The continuous learning 
nature of incremental learning makes it highly scalable and more eﬃ-
cient in terms of time and computational resources. It enables the model 
to stay up-to-date, making it adaptable to changing data.
This research article aims to develop, implement, and evaluate a 
scalable and adaptable phishing URL detection framework that lever-
ages similarity index and incremental learning techniques to combat 
phishing attacks eﬀectively. The objectives encompass constructing a 
comprehensive phishing URL dataset, proposing a URL similarity in-
dex for detecting visual similarity-based attacks, designing an adaptable 
phishing URL detection framework with diverse security proﬁles, and 
enhancing model performance through pre-training to improve robust-
ness and generalization.
The major contribution of this research work is as follows.
• An extensible dataset construction approach is proposed and im-
plemented to construct a large phishing URL dataset encompassing 
134850 legitimate and 100945 phishing URLs.


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
3
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
• A URL similarities index calculation technique is proposed that 
helps to detect URL visual similarity-based attacks such as zero-
width characters, homograph, punycode, homophone, bit squat-
ting, and combosquatting attacks.
• A diverse security proﬁle empowered incremental lea-rning-based 
scalable phishing URL detection framework is proposed that pro-
vides better scalability and adaptability and prevents model stal-
eness problems. The proposed model performance enhancement 
approach leverages readily available data to pre-train the incre-
mental learning model to enhance its robustness and generalization 
capabilities.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides 
background on existing phishing attack detection methods and chal-
lenges that need to be addressed while developing a modern and sophis-
ticated phishing URL detection system. Further, Section 3 explains our 
approach to construct the phishing URL dataset. In Section 4, we pro-
pose URL similarity index (USI) and incremental learning-based phish-
ing URL detection technique. The experimental result is presented and 
discussed in Section 5. Despite its potential, the proposed framework 
has limitations, discussed in 6. Finally, we conclude the paper in sec-
tion 7 with a summary of our contributions.
2. Related work and challenges
A thorough understanding of the existing literature and studies on 
machine learning-based phishing attack detection techniques is crucial 
for identifying the gaps, limitations, and opportunities that drive our 
research forward. By examining the relevant work conducted by other 
researchers, we gain valuable insights into the current state of the ﬁeld 
and the challenges that have been encountered. The following subsec-
tions delve into the related work and challenges surrounding machine 
learning-based phishing attack detection techniques.
2.1. Related work
Various researchers have developed techniques to detect and miti-
gate phishing URL attacks to combat the growing menace of phishing 
URL attacks. This subsection will discuss the machine learning-based 
approaches closely related to the proposed work. Further, it summa-
rizes the key ﬁndings and methodologies employed in each study. This 
exploration of the existing literature provides a foundation for our re-
search.
Gupta et al. (2021) proposed an innovative machine-learning ap-
proach to detect phishing URLs. Their approach involves extracting and 
analyzing lexical features present within the URLs, presenting a pow-
erful tool for combating fraudulent phishing URL attacks. Although 
the researcher extracted many features from the URL, with the help 
of feature selection, they selected only nine features by implementing 
multiple feature importance algorithms. The ML model’s dependence 
on the reduced number of features makes it best suitable for resource-
constrained devices. RF, SVM, KNN, and LR algorithms have been ex-
perimented on ISCXURL-2016, and RF achieved the highest accuracy of 
99.57%. Pandey and Mishra (2023) proposed Phish-Sight, which takes 
a screenshot of a test webpage and matches it with the screenshot of its 
counterpart legitimate website based on a visual inspection similar to 
the human approach of distinguishing two similar sites. For visual simi-
larity inspection, Phish-Sight implements dominant color features, eight 
RGB color palette features, and optical character recognition (OCR) to 
extract the eighteen most targeted brand names. Both are extracted 
from the test website screenshot. Five classical ML techniques, namely 
DT, LR, NB, RF, and SVM, were implemented on the extracted features 
to investigate the test URL. SVM outperformed other ML algorithms, 
achieving an accuracy of 99.13%.
To construct a dataset, Ahammad et al. (2022) collected linguistic 
and domain-based properties from 1500 phishing and 1500 legitimate 
URLs. The dataset includes statistical information from phishtank.com 
and DNS information from WHOIS. It also includes existence symbols 
such as ‘@’ or ‘-’ symbol, http or https information based on the posi-
tion of ‘//,’ the length of the URL, and the number of subpages. The 
researchers employed ﬁve machine learning models, namely RF, DT, 
LightGBM, LR, and SVM, respectively, to build an ML model for identi-
fying phishing URLs. In their experiment, based on classiﬁcation accu-
racy and analysis of the validation curve, LightGBM outperformed other 
models. An eﬃcient malicious mobile webpage detection approach, 
APuML (Anti Phishing using Machine Learning), is proposed by Jain et 
al. (2022) that detects drive-by downloads, zero-day, and clickjacking 
attacks eﬀectively. APuML extracts features of various webpage com-
ponents, such as URL features, mobile-speciﬁc features, HTML features, 
JavaScript features, and website-speciﬁc features, and creates feature 
vectors for 2000 legitimate and 2000 phishing webpages. Further, a 
mutual information-based feature selection technique is implemented, 
and a set of eleven features that includes nine binary and two Naive 
Bayes probability features are identiﬁed. Finally, the researchers ex-
perimented with various machine learning algorithms, and the random 
forest algorithm achieved the highest detection accuracy of 93.85%.
Alani and Tawﬁk (2022) proposed PhishNot, a machine learning-
based phishing URL detection system that relies on very few features 
extracted from URLs. The researcher achieved high accuracy by ex-
perimenting with several algorithms and selecting the one with the 
highest accuracy, easy implementability by relying on a few features 
extracted from URLs, high eﬃciency by lowering the data acquisition 
time and prediction time, and ease of access by deploying it as a plug-in 
in browsers, or any other deployment architecture. PhishNot has exper-
imented with RF, LR, DT, GNB, and MLP machine-learning algorithms. 
Random forest achieved the highest accuracy of 97.5%. Ding et al. 
(2019) proposed Search & Heuristic Rule & Logistic Regression (SHLR) 
for detecting phishing websites. SHLR includes three steps to ﬁlter le-
gitimate websites eﬃciently. Initially, it extracts the title tag from the 
website and searches it on the Baidu search engine to ﬁnd its rank. If 
the ranking is under 10, it is considered legitimate; otherwise, the sec-
ond step is involved further analysis. In the second step, seven heuristic 
rules are developed based on character features to detect obfuscated 
URLs. Then, it checks the URL against these rules. Those URLs matched 
with the rules and were identiﬁed as pushing; otherwise, the third step 
is called for further analysis. In the third step, a machine-learning model 
is built using logistic regression. It extracts relevant features from the 
webpage and trains the model. During the experiment, SHLR achieved 
an accuracy of 98.9%.
Sharma and Singh (2022) proposed a phishing detection technique 
that implements term frequency and inverse document frequency (TF-
IDF) to analyze webpage and measure the quantity of information a 
word provides based on the word’s frequency in the document. Further, 
the AdaBoost algorithm is employed to enhance the classiﬁcation ac-
curacy of the proposed technique. In their comprehensive research en-
deavor, the researchers investigated a dataset of 50000 URLs, yielding 
impressive results in terms of recognition accuracy when diﬀerentiating 
between phishing sites and legitimate ones. Furthermore, it was exper-
imentally shown that the analysis and calculation performed before 
machine learning improved the proposed technique’s overall perfor-
mance. The technique achieved an accuracy of 98.014%. Nagunwa et al. 
(2022) proposed an ML approach to detect phishing webpages hosted 
in Fast Flux Service Networks (FFSNs). The devices frequently change 
in such networks, which makes the blocklisting technique less eﬀective. 
The proposed approach introduces 56 highly diversiﬁed features de-
rived from the characteristics of the hosting network. These predictive 
features are further analyzed using eight machine learning and three 
deep learning algorithms powered by binary and multi-class classiﬁca-
tion models. The binary classiﬁcation approach achieved an accuracy 
of 98.42%, eﬀectively distinguishing between phishing and legitimate 
URLs. Similarly, in multi-class classiﬁcation, the researchers achieved 
an accuracy of 97.81%, further aﬃrming their proposed methodology’s 


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
4
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Table 1
Comparative summary of related work with proposed work.
Ref.
Features
Detection model
Dataset 
records
Accu-
racy
Limitations
Gupta et al. (2021)
URL features only
Depends on Random forest 
algorithm
11964
99.57%
Depends solely on URL features, and on single ML 
algorithm, experimented on small dataset
Pandey and Mishra (2023)
Dominant color features and 
OCR
Depends on Random forest 
algorithm
6200
99.13%
Depends solely on single ML algorithm, 
experimented on small dataset
Ahammad et al. (2022)
URL Features only
RF, DT, Light GBM, LR, and 
SVM
3000
89.50%
Low prediction performances, experimented on 
small dataset
Jain et al. (2022)
Static and site popularity 
features
LR, KNN, SVM, DT, and RF
4000
93.85%
Depends on third party features, low prediction 
performances, experimented on small dataset
Alani and Tawﬁk (2022)
URL and third-party features
RF, LR, DT, GNB, and MLP
88646
97.50%
Depends on third party features, low prediction 
performances
Ding et al. (2019)
URL, HTML and third-party 
features
Logistic regression
8659
98.90%
Depends on third party features, depends on single 
ML algorithm, small dataset
Sharma and Singh (2022)
Features from webpage 
HTML code
TF-IDF and AdaBoost
50000
98.01%
Depends on single ML algorithm, small dataset
Nagunwa et al. (2022)
Features derived from DNS, 
host, and network
Eight ML and three DL 
algorithms
11801
98.42%
Computationally expensive model (11 algorithms), 
small dataset
Sameen et al. (2020)
URL Features only
Boosting-based (2), Ten 
algorithms
100000
98.00%
Computationally expensive model (10 algorithms)
Rao et al. (2022)
HTML code, and domain 
speciﬁc features
RF, SVM, LR, DT, and 
XGBoost
10514
99.34%
Experimented on small dataset
Proposed
URL, HTML, and derived 
features
BernoulliNB, 
PassiveAggressive, and 
SGDClassiﬁer
235795
99.79%
Limitation of classifying URLs that download 
executable ﬁle.
robustness and reliability in accurately classifying URLs across multiple 
categories.
Sameen et al. (2020) introduced PhishHaven, a cutting-edge sys-
tem speciﬁcally tailored to detect both AI-generated and human-crafted 
phishing URLs. PhishHaven’s innovative approach harnesses the power 
of ensemble learning, providing an eﬀective defense against a wide 
range of sophisticated phishing attacks. The researcher implements lex-
ical analysis for extracting useful features. The URL HTML Encoding 
is further introduced as lexical feature to boost the detection capabil-
ity. PhishHaven exhibits proﬁciency in detecting tiny URLs through 
its advanced URL Hit approach. By meticulously opening each URL 
and comparing the resulting reply URL with the requested tiny URL, 
PhishHaven eﬀectively identiﬁes and scrutinizes these condensed URLs, 
providing a comprehensive defense against potential phishing threats. 
Finally, a voting-based ensemble learning technique is implemented to 
detect phishing URLs. PhishHaven has experimented on 100000 legiti-
mate and phishing URLs and achieved an accuracy of 98%. Rao et al. 
(2022) proposed a phishing detection technique that does not depend 
on third-party information such as webpage ranking, webpage age, or 
search engine indexing. The proposed technique is based on plain text 
from webpage code and domain-speciﬁc text. The plain text is extracted 
from the webpage source and fed to frequency (TF-IDF and count vec-
torization) and prediction (Word2Vec, GloVe, and FastText) based word 
embedding algorithm to create a word dictionary. The domain-speciﬁc 
texts are copyright information, webpage title, and HTML headers. Both 
plain text and domain features are used to create feature vectors. Fur-
ther, the feature vector is fed into both ensemble and multimodal ma-
chine learning algorithms. The multimodal approach achieved higher 
accuracy with 99.34%.
In conclusion, the extensive research in machine learning-based 
phishing URL detection has demonstrated signiﬁcant progress and 
promising results. However, several key observations and requirements 
have emerged from the reviewed literature, underscoring the need for a 
comprehensive framework to address the challenges and limitations in 
this domain. The major challenges identiﬁed in the reviewed work are 
discussed in detail in the next subsection.
Furthermore, a comparative summary is provided in Table 1 that 
shows the advantages of the proposed work over the state-of-the-art.
2.2. Challenges
Despite signiﬁcant development against phishing URL attacks, it 
continues posing serious threat to online security. The existing ap-
proaches to combat phishing attacks seem insuﬃcient to address the 
ever-evolving sophisticated phishing techniques and the emergence of 
previously unseen phishing URLs. Based on the above discussion, we 
identiﬁed the following major areas that need to be addressed while 
developing a modern and sophisticated phishing URL detection system 
and where our research aims to make a signiﬁcant impact.
Continuous training: Phishing attacks constantly evolve, and new 
attack techniques and patterns emerge regularly. By continuously train-
ing the machine learning model, it can adapt to the changing landscape 
of cyber threats. Continuous training of machine learning models helps 
improve adaptability, accuracy, early detection of zero-day attacks, and 
enhanced behavioral analysis. Regular updates help the model stay 
current and learn from new attack patterns, making it more eﬀective 
in identifying and mitigating emerging phishing threats. Most existing 
studies implement classical machine learning algorithms to build the 
model. Researchers train the model once and continue using the same 
trained model to detect attacks. It prevents a model from gaining expo-
sure to a wider range of legitimate and phishing URL scenarios. Classical 
machine learning algorithms often struggle to adapt to the evolving na-
ture of phishing attacks, as they require periodic retraining to maintain 
optimal performance.
Latest and large dataset: Phishing attack techniques and strate-
gies constantly evolve as cybercriminals ﬁnd new ways to deceive end 
users. By incorporating the latest datasets, the machine learning model 
can learn from recent attack patterns and identify new phishing tech-
niques. A large phishing URL dataset enables the model to learn from 
a wide range of attack vectors and improve its ability to detect phish-
ing attacks eﬀectively. Many researchers have trained the model on old 
and small datasets, which does not accurately evaluate and benchmark 
the machine learning model against the most recent phishing attacks.
Dependencies on third-party features: Many existing studies de-
pend on third-party features such as age, rank, and country where 
the URL is registered. Relying on these features introduces a depen-
dency on their availability and reliability. If the third-party provider 
experiences downtime or discontinues their service, it can signiﬁcantly 
impact the model. Therefore, dependence on third-party features can 


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
5
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
have potential drawbacks and negative impacts on the model’s long-
term sustainability.
Dependency solely on URL features: The dependency of a ma-
chine learning model solely on URL features restricts the model’s ability 
to capture other important contextual information, such as webpage 
content. For example, webpage content provides huge amounts of in-
formation that can be used to detect phishing URLs more accurately.
Dependencies on a single ML algorithm: Many developed defense 
systems against a phishing attack depend on a single machine learning 
model. However, every machine learning algorithm has its strengths 
and weaknesses. Relying solely on a single machine learning algorithm 
may result in an inability to handle diverse data and limit the capability 
to detect the constantly evolving phishing attacks.
In summary, examining the challenges identiﬁed in the previous re-
search highlights the critical areas that require further attention and 
innovation in machine learning-based phishing attack detection. Fur-
thermore, these challenges are the impetus for developing a compre-
hensive framework to address these limitations and propel the ﬁeld 
forward.
3. Proposed framework
Phishing attacks continue to pose signiﬁcant threats in today’s digi-
tal landscape. In response to this growing problem, this research work 
presents PhiUSIIL, a phishing URL detection framework combining two 
key components: URL similarity index and incremental learning. This 
combination provides a robust and adaptive approach to detecting 
phishing URLs in real-time. PhiUSIIL’s unique contribution lies in its 
focus on developing a diverse security proﬁle that accommodates di-
verse user requirements. We include the above discussed in PhiUSIIL’s 
phishing URL detection module. In addition, the PhiUSIIL framework 
has an extensible dataset construction module to construct a phishing 
URL dataset called PhiUSIIL phishing URL dataset. The PhiUSIIL phish-
ing URL dataset can be used as a benchmark dataset to pre-train the 
incremental learning model. We will start by explaining the PhiUSIIL 
phishing URL dataset construction module and then move to the next 
section to discuss the phishing URL detection module.
3.1. PhiUSIIL phishing URL dataset construction module
The following subsection discusses the approach of constructing an 
extensible phishing URL dataset. We collected legitimate URLs from 
Open PageRank Initiative Anon (2023g) and phishing URLs from Phish-
Tank, OpenPhish, and MalwareWorld. We start with explaining the 
steps to download the webpages using the collected legitimate and 
phishing URLs. Further, features that are critical to detecting phishing 
URLs are discussed.
3.1.1. Downloading phishing webpage
Phishing websites are created to steal sensitive information from 
unsuspecting users by tricking them into believing that the URL they 
are accessing is genuine. These websites are taken down by internet 
service providers or hosting providers once security researchers or or-
ganizations discover their suspicious activity. Cybercriminals abandon 
the site quickly to create a new and more convincing phishing site. The 
quick discovery of phishing websites makes its lifespan incredibly short 
(Wei et al., 2020). Therefore, it is important to download such websites 
before they are blocked or removed. We decided to monitor various 
anti-phishing sites continuously to get the list of latest phishing web-
sites. Anti-phishing sites such as PhishTank Anon (2023d), OpenPhish 
Anon (2023e), and MalwareWorld Anon (2023f) actively monitor the 
internet to discover new phishing websites.
Once we get a new phishing URL, we download the webpage re-
ferred to by the phishing URL. We try to download them before they dis-
appear. Accessing malicious webpages through web browsers is risky; 
we set up a separate environment to download the phishing webpage 
programmatically and stored it locally as a .txt ﬁle. A Java program 
is developed that takes PhishID and PhishURL as input to read the 
webpage referred by the PhishURL and save it locally with the name 
PhishID.txt. The one-line Java code to do these tasks is given here.
Files.writeString(Paths.get(PhishID+“.txt”)
,HttpClient.newHttpClient().send(HttpRequest
.newBuilder().uri(URI.create(PhishURL)).GET()
.build(),HttpResponse.BodyHandlers.ofString())
.body(),StandardCharsets.UTF_8);
Where, ID is a unique ID for each phishing URL and PhishURL is 
the URL of the phishing webpage.
We continuously monitored anti-phishing sites and downloaded 
over 100000 phishing webpages from October 2022 to May 2023. The 
above-discussed approach is used to download over 100000 legitimate 
webpages used to construct the dataset.
3.1.2. Extracting URL features
URL features can be an important aspect of phishing URL detection 
as they provide valuable information about the legitimacy of a web-
page. Machine learning models can use these features to analyze a URL 
to identify phishing URLs. Although the URL feature has a high poten-
tial to identify a phishing URL, we cannot depend only on these features. 
A cybercriminal may learn the URL-based detection mechanism and cre-
ate more sophisticated URLs to invade the system. Some of the key URL 
features we extracted to construct the dataset are discussed here.
TLD: TLD (Top Level Domain) is the last part of the domain name, 
such as .com or .edu. Phishing URLs often use TLDs that are not com-
monly associated with the legitimate domain, such as .link or .inf.
URLLength: Phishing URLs are often longer than legitimate URLs as 
they contain additional digits, symbols, subdirectories, and parameters.
IsDomainIP: a URL using an IP address instead of a domain name 
can be a red ﬂag for users.
NoOfSubDomain: Subdomain is part of URL that appears before 
domain name. Cybercriminals often use visual similarity techniques to 
trick users. They create subdomains that look like subdomain of legiti-
mate websites.
NoOfObfuscatedChar: Shows a count of obfuscated characters in 
URL. Obfuscated URL https://abc .com %6d opens https://abc .comm
and obfuscated URL https://facebook .com @%61 %62 %63 .%43 %4F %
4D opens https://abc -.com and try to login https://abc .com.
IsHTTPS: Indicates if the webpage is running on unsecured HTTP 
(hypertext transfer protocol) or secured HTTPS. A URL using the http 
protocol is highly likely to be a phishing URL. Most legitimate websites, 
especially those that require users to input sensitive information like 
passwords or credit card numbers, use HTTPS to protect their users’ 
data. If a webpage asks for sensitive information but doesn’t use HTTPS, 
it could be a sign that the webpage is a phishing scam.
No. of digits, equal, qmark, amp: A large number of digits or sym-
bols such as ‘=’, ‘?’, or ‘%’ in a URL increases the possibility of being a 
phishing URL.
3.1.3. Extracting HTML features
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) is a standard markup language 
used to create webpages. Inspecting the HTML code of a webpage can 
help detect phishing sites by identifying suspicious elements or code 
that may be used to collect sensitive information, trick users into mak-
ing monetary transactions, or redirect users to a phishing website. Cer-
tain HTML features that can be used to identify potentially suspicious 
or fraudulent websites are extracted from the webpage HTML code to 
construct the dataset. Some of such key HTML features are discussed 
here.
LargestLineLength: Cybercriminals may use encrypted text to hide 
the actual code from the user. A longer line of code may indicate code 
obfuscation.
HasTitle: Most legitimate websites have page titles provided. Miss-
ing title tags may indicate a phishing scam.


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
6
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
HasFavicon: Most legitimate websites have their website logo in-
cluded in the favicon tag. Missing a favicon tag may indicate a phishing 
scam.
IsResponsive: Most legitimate websites are responsive, which helps 
web content to be appropriately adapted across devices to give bet-
ter readability and view. Fortunately, many phishing websites are not 
responsive, as threat actors ﬁnd it challenging to ensure the responsive-
ness of their quickly designed websites on all major devices.
NoOfURLRedirect: Phishing sites may use redirects to direct users 
to a diﬀerent page than they were expecting. For example, the HTML 
code may contain JavaScript or meta tags that redirect users to a dif-
ferent URL. The HTML tags such as ‘http-equiv’, ‘refresh’, ‘window.lo-
cation’, ‘window.location.replace’, ‘window.location-.href’, ‘http.open’ 
can help identify URL redirection.
HasDescription: Legitimate websites provide page descriptions for 
each page using the ‘description’ meta name. Missing page descriptions 
may raise a red ﬂag for a webpage.
NoOfPopup, NoOﬁFrame: Phishing websites may use pop-ups or 
iframe to distract users and capture sensitive information. These pop-
ups and iframe can be detected by looking for tags ‘window.open’ and 
‘iframe’ in the HTML code.
HasExternal FormSubmit: Phishing sites often use HTML forms to 
collect user information. Form submitting to an external URL can be a 
red ﬂag for users.
HasCopyrightInfo, HasSocialNet: Most legitimate websites have 
copyright and their social networking information. Missing such infor-
mation may indicate a phishing scam.
HasPasswordField, HasSubmitButton: HTML provides a variety 
of form elements that allow users to input data and submit it to other 
URLs. For example, HTML tags such as ‘passwordﬁeld’ or ‘submitbutton’ 
can be extracted to examine the HTML code of the webpage.
HasHiddenFields: Phishing websites may use hidden ﬁelds to cap-
ture sensitive information without the user’s knowledge. These ﬁelds 
can be detected by examining the HTML code of the webpage.
Bank, Pay, Crypto: Elements such as bank, pay, or crypto may indi-
cate that the webpage is asking for sensitive ﬁnancial information from 
the user, which may be used to siphon money. Therefore, such websites 
need to be analyzed for suspicious activities.
NoOfImage: Threat actors can use screenshots of legitimate web-
sites and design phishing websites to make them appear more legiti-
mate. More images used in respectively small websites may indicate 
phishing websites.
NoOfJS: JavaScript is a programming language that can be embed-
ded in HTML to create interactive webpages. Phishing websites may 
use JavaScript to create pop-up windows or other misleading elements 
that trick users into revealing sensitive information. A large number of 
JavaScript included in a webpage can make it suspicious.
NoOfSelfRef, NoOfEmptyRef, NoOfExternalRef: Hyperlinks (href) 
are clickable links that allow users to navigate between webpages or 
navigate to external webpages. Phishing websites may use hyperlinks 
that appear to direct to a legitimate webpage, but instead, they redirect 
the user to a phishing page. A large number of hyperlinks navigating to 
itself, navigating to empty links, or navigating to external links can be 
suspicious.
3.1.4. Crafting derived features
CharContinuationRate: CharContinuationRate indicates how a 
URL contains the alphabet, digit, or special characters. To ﬁnd the Char-
ContinuationRate of a URL, we identiﬁed the longest alphabet, digit, 
and special character sequences and total their length. Further, the to-
tal length of these sequences is divided by the totaled length of the URL. 
URLs such as www.abc.com, www.abc123.com, or www.abc_123.com 
can give one CharContinuationRate value. However, URLs such as 
www.a1b2c3.com or www.a1_b-_2.com get lower CharContinuation-
Rate.
URLTitleMatchScore: Cybercriminals often use social engineering 
tactics to trick users into believing a website is legitimate. They may 
use a URL that looks similar to a legitimate website and create a con-
vincing webpage title reﬂecting the website’s content. We introduced 
URLTitleMatchScore to identify the discrepancy between the URL and 
the webpage title. A lower score can be a sign that the website is a 
phishing attempt because the webpage title does not match the content 
that is expected to be found on the website. A higher score 100 or close 
to 100 indicates that the website is what it claims to be. The code to 
calculate URLTitleMatchScore is given in Algorithm 1.
URLCharProb: While most legitimate URLs look meaningful, many 
phishing URLs contain random alphabet, digits, and misspelled words 
that do not look meaningful. Often, an attacker uses the typosquatting 
technique to create a URL similar to a legitimate URL but with small 
typographical errors. To understand the pattern of each alphabet and 
digit in a URL, we count the occurrence of each alphabet and digit in 
the 10 million legitimate URLs and divide them by the total count of all 
alphabets and digits of 10 million legitimate URLs. Further, to compare 
it with the pattern of phishing URLs, we collected 7 million phishing 
URLs and calculated the probability of each alphabet and digit using the 
same method. Finally, a comparative graph is plotted in Fig. 2. It shows 
that most of the characters such as a, c, e, o, r, and t are more frequently 
used in legitimate URLs, while alphabets such as b, f, q, v, w, x, y, z, 
and all the digits are more frequent in phishing URLs. The probability of 
each alphabet and digit calculated from the 10 million legitimate URLs, 
shown in Equation (1), is used to calculate the URLCharProb of a URL 
by combining the probability of each alphabet and digit and dividing it 
by the URL length. The formula to calculate the URLCharProb of each 
URL is given below.
𝑈𝑅𝐿𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏=
𝑛
∑
𝑖=0
𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏(𝑈𝑅𝐿[𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟t])
𝑛
(1)
where, n is count of characters from a-z and digits from 0-9.
TLDLegitimateProb: The top-level domain (TLD) is the last part of 
a domain name that indicates the purpose or origin of a URL. Phishing 
attackers often use TLDs that are uncommon or unrelated to the purpose 
of the website they are trying to spoof. Legitimate websites often use 
speciﬁc TLDs associated with their industry or location. We extracted all 
the TLDs from the top 10 million websites and counted the occurrence 
of each TLD. Further, we calculated the ratio of each TLD by dividing 
the total occurrence of that TLD by the total occurrence of all the TLDs. 
A higher TLDLegitimateProb of a URL may indicate a legitimate URL, 
and a lower TLDLegitimateProb value may help identify phishing URLs.
In summary, the phishing URL dataset construction technique in-
volves extracting and analyzing the URL, HTML, and derived features 
to create a comprehensive dataset for detecting phishing attacks. These 
features provide valuable information about the potential malicious in-
tent of the URL.
4. PhiUSIIL’s phishing URL detection module
The PhiUSIIL phishing URL detection module is divided into two 
phases. Phase 1 is URL similarity index(USI) based phishing URL detec-
tion, and Phase 2 is incremental learning-based phishing URL detection.
Phase 1 computes the URL similarity index for a given URL to iden-
tify phishing URLs. The given URL is blocked if its USI is >=80 and 
<100; otherwise, it activates Phase 2. When Phase 2 is activated, it ex-
tracts key features from the URL and HTML code to generate feature 
vector for the given URL. The feature vector is fed into the incremental 
leering model in the next stage to get a classiﬁcation score. Further, this 
score is used to classify the URL as legitimate or phishing. Each phase 
of the PhiUSIIL phishing URL detection module is explained in detail in 
the following subsections. The working of the PhiUSIIL phishing URL 
detection is shown in Fig. 3.


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
7
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Algorithm 1 Calculation of URL-Title match score.
Require: Webpage title and URL
Ensure: URL-Title matching score
1: 𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑡 ⇐𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑙𝑒.𝑠𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑡()
⊳remove ’https’, ’http’, ’www’, and TLD from URL to get root domain
2: 𝑡𝑥𝑡𝑈𝑅𝐿 ⇐𝑅𝑜𝑜𝑡𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑈𝑅𝐿)
3: call URLTitleMatchScore(tSet, txtURL)
4: 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ⇐𝑈𝑅𝐿𝑇𝑖𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒(𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑡, 𝑡𝑥𝑡𝑈𝑅𝐿)
5: function URLTITLEMATCHSCORE(Set,Txt)
6:
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ⇐0
7:
𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ⇐100∕(𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑇𝑥𝑡))
8:
for element in Set do
9:
if 𝑇𝑥𝑡.𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑑(𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡) >= 0 then
10:
𝑛 ⇐𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡)
11:
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ⇐𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 + 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ∗𝑛
12:
𝑇𝑥𝑡 ⇐𝑇𝑥𝑡.𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒(𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡, ” ”)
13:
if 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 > 99.9 then
14:
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ⇐100
15:
end if
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
return score
19: end function
Fig. 2. Probability comparison of alphabets and digits in legitimate URLs versus phishing URLs.
4.1. Phase 1: URL similarity index based phishing URL detection
The URL similarity index is calculated between a source URL and 
a target URL. The source URL is the given URL for calculating USI. 
The target URL is a URL from the list of the top 10 million legitimate 
websites downloaded from Open PageRank Initiative. Our idea is to ﬁnd 
how closely a URL from the list matches any of the URLs from the top 
10 million list. A USI 100 shows a legitimate URL, and a USI close to 
100 may indicate a phishing URL that looks very similar to a legitimate 
URL. Each character of the source and target URL is compared; for each 
matching character, one similarity value is calculated and assigned to 
it. For all unmatched characters, the ith character from the longest URL 
is deleted, and the value of i is reduced by 1 to compare the same ith
position again in the next iteration.
The maximum USI is considered 100, and the minimum is 0. Ini-
tially, 100 is divided into two equal parts. Further, the ﬁrst 50 is equally 
distributed to all the URL characters as the base similarity value. The 
remaining 50 is distributed based on the weighted similarity value cal-
culated for each matching character. For each ith matching character, 
the weighted similarity value is calculated and added to the base sim-
ilarity value. Finally, the sum of similarity value of all the matching 
characters is calculated as USI. A URL with USI value higher than 80 
is considered as phishing URL and blocked by PhiUSIIL. The machine 
learning mode analyzes the remaining URLs.
The formula to calculate USI between two URLs, Src and Tar, is 
given in Equation (2), and complete calculation steps are given in Algo-
rithm 2.
𝑈𝑅𝐿𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥(𝑈𝑆𝐼) =
𝑛
∑
𝑖=0
50
𝑛+ 100 ∗(𝑛−𝑖)
𝑛∗(𝑛+ 1)
(2)
where, n is length of longest URL in Src and Tar
4.2. Phase 2: Incremental learning based phishing URL detection
If a URL is not classiﬁed by Phase 1, PhiUSIIL Phase 2 is activated. 
In Phase 2, we will start with the discussion of the prerequisite of the 
incremental learning-based phishing URL detection.
In the following subsections, we discuss the implemented feature se-
lection techniques to get a reduced feature set. Next, we discuss the 
technique to select the most suitable incremental learning algorithm. 
Then we discuss the hyperparameter tuning to improve the model’s per-
formance. Further, the selected algorithms are employed to a diverse 
security proﬁle empowered incremental learning model to classify the 
given URL. Each stage is discussed in the following subsections.


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
8
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Fig. 3. Work ﬂow of PhiUSIIL’s phishing URL detection framework.
Algorithm 2 SimilaritiesIndex calculation between two URLs.
1: function GETURLSIMILARITYINDEX(Src, Tar)
#Set X=shortest URL, Y=longest URL, and n=length of shortest URL from Src and Tar URLs
2:
𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑛 = 𝑔𝑒𝑡𝑀𝑖𝑛(𝑆𝑟𝑐, 𝑇𝑎𝑟)
3:
𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ𝑂𝑓𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑈𝑅𝐿(𝑁) ⇐𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑆𝑟𝑐), 𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑇𝑎𝑟))
4:
𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥(𝑆𝐼) ⇐0
5:
𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒(𝑎) ⇐50∕𝑁
6:
𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑂𝑓𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑙𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑠(𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚) ⇐(𝑁∗(𝑁+ 1))∕2
7:
for i in range(0, n) do
8:
if 𝑋[𝑖] == 𝑌[𝑖] then
9:
𝑆𝐼⇐𝑆𝐼+ 𝑎 + (50 ∗(𝑁−𝑖))∕𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚
10:
else
#Remove ith (unmatched) character from longest URL
11:
𝑌⇐𝑌[∶𝑖] + 𝑌[𝑖 + 1 ∶]
#Set X=shortest, Y=longest, and n=length of shortest URL
12:
𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑛 ⇐𝑔𝑒𝑡𝑀𝑖𝑛(𝑆𝑟𝑐, 𝑇𝑎𝑟)
13:
𝑖 ⇐𝑖 −1
14:
end if
15:
end for
16: end function
17: function GETMIN(Src,Tar)
return min(Src,Tar),max(Src,Tar), min(len(Src),len(Tar))
18: end function
4.2.1. Prerequisite
The prerequisite section discusses the implemented feature selection 
to get a reduced feature set, the technique to select the most suitable 
incremental learning algorithm, and the hyperparameter tuning to im-
prove the model’s performance.
Feature selection: Feature selection is an essential and crucial step 
in machine learning that involves identifying and choosing the most 


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
9
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Table 2
Experimental result of selected incremental learning algorithm on Phishing Attack dataset.
Algorithms
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1Score
Training 
Time
Count
BernoulliNB
0.98654
0.97875
0.99812
0.98834
158
4
GaussianNB
0.57154
0.57154
1
0.72736
140
1
MultinomialNB
0.69085
0.65370
0.97626
0.78307
212
0
PassiveAggressive
0.99418
0.99424
0.99557
0.99491
108
4
Perceptron
0.94364
0.91122
0.99869
0.95295
135
2
SGDClassiﬁer
0.94658
0.91604
0.99800
0.95527
108
4
relevant and informative features from a larger set of available fea-
tures (Verma and Chandra, 2023; Srijayanthi and Sethukarasi, 2023). 
While relevant and informative features can enhance the performance 
of machine learning models, irrelevant or redundant features can intro-
duce noise and complexity, leading to poor performance of the machine 
learning model.
Although all the features are thoughtfully extracted or derived from 
the URL or HTML code, it is important to identify their relevance 
for machine learning. Determining and quantifying the importance of 
individual features helps select and discard features in machine learn-
ing. Having a high number of features can increase the complexity of 
the model and potentially make it harder to interpret. Feature impor-
tance helps identify less inﬂuential features and can be safely removed 
without signiﬁcantly aﬀecting model performance. Feature importance 
scores can help identify which features impact the model’s predictions 
most and are relevant for machine learning. We followed the following 
steps to identify relevant features.
• We implemented RandomForestClassiﬁer, Decision-TreeClassiﬁer, 
LGBMClassiﬁer, and XGBClassiﬁer to ﬁnd the importance of each 
feature. All these algorithms have an attribute called feature im-
portances that assigns a relative importance score to each feature 
based on their contribution to the ﬁnal prediction. Each machine 
learning algorithm has diﬀerent techniques to calculate feature im-
portance. Creating an ensemble for feature importance using mul-
tiple algorithms oﬀers robustness by capturing diverse insights. We 
selected all the features having feature importance values higher 
than zero. We selected all the features having feature importance 
values higher than zero.
• The mutual information value is measured for all the features iden-
tiﬁed from step one using Mutual_info_cla-ssif. Mutual_info_classif 
measures the independent variable’s dependency on the dependent 
variable. The top 85% of features are selected based on their higher 
Mutual_info_classif value.
Identify most suitable incremental learning algorithms: Diﬀer-
ent machine learning algorithms are designed to work with diﬀerent 
types of data and have diﬀerent problem-solving approaches. If un-
suitable algorithms are selected for a particular dataset, it may not 
achieve accurate and reliable results. Unsuitable algorithms may not 
even converge, making it impossible to obtain useful insights from the 
data. Therefore, it is important to evaluate and select the most appropri-
ate algorithms for a given dataset through experiments. The proposed 
model is based on an ensemble of three incremental learning algo-
rithms. While it is not necessary to limit the number of incremental 
learning algorithms used in an ensemble, keeping the number of algo-
rithms to three can simplify the implementation and management of 
the ensemble model. Training multiple incremental learning algorithms 
can be computationally expensive, especially when dealing with large 
datasets. Limiting the number of algorithms used in the ensemble can 
help reduce the computational overhead and speed up the training pro-
cess.
Our experiment involved trying out diﬀerent algorithms that sup-
port incremental learning, such as MultinomialNB (Multinomial Naive 
Bayes), BernoulliNB (Bernoulli Naive Bayes), PassiveAggressiveClassi-
ﬁer, Perceptron, and SGDClassiﬁer (Stochastic Gradient Descent), com-
paring their classiﬁcation performance. Next, we identiﬁed the top 
three incremental learning algorithms from Accuracy, Precision, Re-
call, F1Score, and Training Time. Finally, we counted the occurrence 
of each algorithm in the top three lists of Accuracy, Precision, Recall, 
F1Score, and Training Time. Based on their count, we select the best 
three algorithms, namely BernoulliNB, PassiveAggressiveClassiﬁer, and 
SGDClassiﬁer, to achieve the most accurate and reliable results by ef-
fectively learning the underlying patterns and relationships from the 
dataset. The experimental result is shown in Table 2. The highlighted 
value indicates the algorithm’s selection in the top three lists.
Hyperparameter tuning: Hyperparameter tuning is a crucial pro-
cess of ﬁnding the best set of hyperparameters for a machine learning 
model that can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in model performance, 
faster convergence, reduced overﬁtting, and more eﬃcient use of com-
putational resources (Sáez-de-Cámara et al., 2023). We implemented 
GridSearchCV based hyperparameter tuning technique to optimize the 
performance of the selected incremental learning algorithms. Grid-
SearchCV works by exhaustively searching through a speciﬁed grid of 
hyperparameter values and evaluating the model’s performance using 
cross-validation. The hyperparameters for all three algorithms and their 
value are given below.
• hpBNB: ‘alpha’: 0.01, ‘binarize’: 0.0, ‘class_prior’: None, ‘ﬁt_prior’: 
False, ‘force_alpha’: True
• hpPA: ‘C’: 5, ‘ﬁt_intercept’: False, ‘n_iter_no_change’: 50, ‘n_jobs’: 
10, ‘shuﬄe’: True
• hpSGD: ‘alpha’: 0.01, ‘eta0’: 100, ‘n_iter_no_change’: 50, ‘n_jobs’: 1
4.2.2. Diverse security proﬁle empowered incremental learning model
This research article proposes a phishing URL classiﬁcation model 
that utilizes three incremental learning algorithms: BernoulliNB, Pas-
siveAggressive, and SGDClassiﬁer. The ensemble of multiple machine 
learning algorithms has shown better classiﬁcation in various studies 
(Taha, 2021; Prasad et al., 2023). These algorithms are identiﬁed from 
previous section based on their performance. The PhiUSIIL introduces 
three distinct security proﬁles, namely LowSecurity, BestSecurity, and 
HighSecurity. Diﬀerent users or organizations may have diverse secu-
rity needs and risk tolerances. By oﬀering diverse security proﬁles, the 
model can cater to these diverse requirements. By providing diﬀerent 
security proﬁles, the model can adapt and adjust its classiﬁcation crite-
ria based on the prevailing threat landscape. This ﬂexibility allows the 
model to maintain optimal performance in dynamic environments with-
out the need for frequent retraining or model updates. All three proﬁles 
are discussed below.
LowSecurity proﬁle: In this proﬁle, if any one of the incremental 
learning algorithms correctly identiﬁes a URL as legitimate, it is clas-
siﬁed as such. Thus, the LowSecurity proﬁle may exhibit higher false 
positives but ensures minimal disruption to legitimate URLs. It avoids 
overblocking legitimate URLs. The LowSecurity proﬁle, with a more le-
nient classiﬁcation threshold, helps minimize the occurrence of false 
positives, ensuring that legitimate URLs are not unnecessarily blocked. 
False positives occur when legitimate URLs are incorrectly classiﬁed as 
phishing URLs. This can lead to disruptions in normal user activities 
and frustration.


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
10
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Algorithm 3 Incremental learning-based phishing URL detection algorithm.
Require: Input for model
Models
df is PhishingURL dataset
Reduced feature set
LABEL denotes class
hpBNB, hpPA, denotes hpSGD are hyperparameters for respective algorithms
1: 𝑑𝑓𝑋⇐𝑝𝑑.𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒(𝑑𝑓[𝑅𝐹𝑆]).𝑐𝑜𝑝𝑦()
2: 𝑑𝑓𝑌⇐𝑝𝑑.𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒(𝑑𝑓[𝐿𝐴𝐵𝐸𝐿]).𝑐𝑜𝑝𝑦()
3: 𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑((“𝐵𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑁𝐵”, 𝐵𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑁𝐵(ℎ𝑝𝐵𝑁𝐵)))
4: 𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑((“𝑃𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒𝐴𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒”, 𝑃𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒𝐴𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑒𝑟(ℎ𝑝𝑃𝐴)))
5: 𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑((“𝑆𝐺𝐷𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑒𝑟”, 𝑆𝐺𝐷𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑒𝑟(ℎ𝑝𝑆𝐺𝐷)))
6: 𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟 = 𝑝𝑑.𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒()
⊳For calculating model performance
7: 𝑋⇐𝑑𝑓𝑋.𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑐[[0]].𝑡𝑜_𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑦(), 𝑌⇐𝑑𝑓𝑌.𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑐[[0]], 𝑌⇐𝑛𝑝.𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑦(𝑌[𝐿𝐴𝐵𝐸𝐿])
8: for name, model in Models do
9:
𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙.𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙_𝑓𝑖𝑡(𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑠 = [0, 1])
⊳Initialize algorithms, to predict ﬁrst on unseen data
10: end for
11: for i in range(1,n) do
12:
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡 ⇐0, 𝑦𝑃⇐0, 𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤 ⇐[]
13:
𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐹𝐼𝐿𝐸𝑁𝐴𝑀𝐸′] ⇐𝑑𝑓[′𝐹𝐼𝐿𝐸𝑁𝐴𝑀𝐸′][𝑖], 𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝑖𝑠𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡′] ⇐0
14:
𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] ⇐0, 𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] ⇐0, 𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] ⇐0
15:
𝑋⇐𝑑𝑓𝑋.𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑐[[𝑖]].𝑡𝑜_𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑦(), 𝑌⇐𝑑𝑓𝑌.𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑐[[𝑖]], 𝑌⇐𝑛𝑝.𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑦(𝑌[𝐿𝐴𝐵𝐸𝐿])
16:
for name, model in Models do
17:
𝑝𝑟 ⇐𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙.𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡(𝑋)
⊳Predicting ﬁrst without training on unseen data
18:
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡 ⇐𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡 + 𝑝𝑟[0]
19:
𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙.𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑓𝑖𝑡(𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑠 = [0, 1])
⊳Post prediction, model training on unseen data
20:
end for
21:
if 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡 == 1 then
22:
𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] ⇐1
23:
else if 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡 == 1 then
24:
𝑦𝑃⇐1
25:
𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] ⇐1, 𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] ⇐1
26:
else
27:
𝑦𝑃⇐1
28:
𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] ⇐1, 𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] ⇐1𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] ⇐1
29:
end if
30:
if 𝑦𝑃== 𝑌[0] then
31:
𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 = 𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 + 1
32:
𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑅𝑜𝑤[′𝑖𝑠𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡′] = 1
33:
end if
34:
𝐴𝑣𝑔𝐿𝑅𝐿𝑖𝑠𝑡.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒∕𝑖)
⊳For plotting learning rate graph
35:
𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟 = 𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑅𝑜𝑤, 𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑒_𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 = 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒)
36: end for
BestSecurity proﬁle: In this proﬁle, if any two incremental learn-
ing algorithms correctly identify a URL as legitimate, it is classiﬁed as 
legitimate. This proﬁle aims to strike a middle ground that satisﬁes the 
security requirements of users or organizations without overly restrict-
ing legitimate URLs or impeding normal online activities, providing 
improved security while maintaining overall acceptable performance.
HighSecurity proﬁle: This proﬁle requires all three incremental 
learning algorithms to correctly identify a URL as legitimate to classify 
it as such. By incorporating the HighSecurity proﬁle, which requires 
consensus among all three incremental learning algorithms, the proﬁle 
achieves a higher level of security. This proﬁle is designed to be more 
conservative while classifying URLs, reducing the risk of false negatives 
(phishing URLs misclassiﬁed as legitimate). It provides an extra layer 
of protection for users or organizations that prioritize stringent security 
measures.
The proposed model is an ensemble of incremental learning models, 
namely BernoulliNB, PassiveAggressive, and SGDClassiﬁer. The incre-
mental training approach we have outlined has a unique and thoughtful 
design to ensure both model training and eﬀective prediction while 
minimizing the risk of exposing test data to the model. Here is the 
step-wise explanation of the incremental training approach we have 
implemented:
• The very ﬁrst record of the dataset is used to train the mode that 
also initializes the model. This is important as an uninitialized 
model cannot be used for prediction.
• A two-step process is involved for each subsequent record in the 
dataset (from the second record onward).
– In the ﬁrst step, the model performs a prediction on the given 
record, generating an initial output.
– In the second step, the same record is used for training the model, 
enhancing its predictive capabilities.
• This approach ensures that each record contributes to both the pre-
diction and the continuous improvement of the model.
• By predicting before training with the same record, we prevent 
the risk of data exposure that can lead to overly optimistic model 
performance.
If the prediction of any algorithm is 1, it means that the algorithm 
has predicted the URL as legitimate. Prediction value 0 shows a phishing 
URL. The prediction total from all the algorithms is stored in the predict 
variable. If the value of predict is 1, the LowSecurity proﬁle algorithms 
predicts it as legitimate. If the value of predict is 2, both LowSecurity 
and BestSecurity proﬁles classify it as legitimate. If the value of predict 
is 3, all three proﬁles classify it as legitimate. Post prediction, all three 
algorithms are partially trained with the new data. The algorithm of 
the proposed approach is given in Algorithm 3. The result calculation 
approach for one of the proﬁles (BestSecurity) is given in Algorithm 4. A 
similar approach is implemented to calculate the result of other proﬁles.
4.2.3. Model performance enhancement using pre-training approach
The classical training approach assumes that the entire training 
dataset is available upfront, and the model is trained on this ﬁxed 
dataset without any incremental training approach. The traditional way 
of training models involves training the model once using the entire 
training data and is commonly used in various machine learning al-
gorithms. Pre-training an incremental model using a classical training 


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
11
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Algorithm 4 Pseudo code for evaluating model´s performance (best security mode).
1: 𝑅𝐸𝑆⇐𝑝𝑑.𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒().𝑐𝑜𝑝𝑦()
2: 𝑅𝐸𝑆[′𝑀1𝑉𝑜𝑡𝑒′] ⇐𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[′𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′]
3: 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠 ⇐𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[𝐿𝐴𝐵𝐸𝐿])
4: 𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑⇐𝑛𝑝.𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[𝐿𝐴𝐵𝐸𝐿] == 𝑅𝐸𝑆[′𝑀1𝑉𝑜𝑡𝑒′], 1, 0).𝑠𝑢𝑚()
5: 𝑇𝑃⇐𝑖𝑛𝑡((𝑛𝑝.𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[𝐿𝐴𝐵𝐸𝐿] == 1, 𝑛𝑝.𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[′𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] == 1, 1, 0), 0)).𝑠𝑢𝑚())
6: 𝑇𝑁⇐𝑖𝑛𝑡((𝑛𝑝.𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[𝐿𝐴𝐵𝐸𝐿] == 0, 𝑛𝑝.𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[′𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] == 0, 1, 0), 0)).𝑠𝑢𝑚())
7: 𝐹𝑃⇐𝑖𝑛𝑡((𝑛𝑝.𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[𝐿𝐴𝐵𝐸𝐿] == 0, 𝑛𝑝.𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[′𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] == 1, 1, 0), 0)).𝑠𝑢𝑚())
8: 𝐹𝑁⇐𝑖𝑛𝑡((𝑛𝑝.𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[𝐿𝐴𝐵𝐸𝐿] == 1, 𝑛𝑝.𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒(𝐻𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑟[′𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦′] == 0, 1, 0), 0)).𝑠𝑢𝑚())
9: 𝑀𝐶𝐶⇐𝑖𝑛𝑡((𝑇𝑃∗𝑇𝑁) −(𝐹𝑃∗𝐹𝑁))∕(𝑖𝑛𝑡((𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑃) ∗(𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁) ∗(𝑇𝑁+ 𝐹𝑃) ∗(𝑇𝑁+ 𝐹𝑁)) ∗∗0.5)
10: 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 ⇐𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑∕𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠
11: 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ⇐𝑇𝑃∕(𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑃)
12: 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦 ⇐𝑇𝑃∕(𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁)
13: 𝐹1𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ⇐2 ∗((𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ∗𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦)∕(𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦))
approach enhances robustness and generalization capabilities. In addi-
tion, this approach can leverage large amounts of readily available data 
that can lead the model to faster convergence and better performance 
on new unseen data. In our experiment, the proposed performance 
enhancement approach involves training the model in two steps: pre-
training and incremental training.
• In the pre-training phase, the model is trained on a portion of the 
records from a dataset. This initial training is typically done to pro-
vide the model with a general understanding of the underlying pat-
terns and features present in the dataset. In addition, pre-training 
helps the model learn useful representations that can be ﬁne-tuned 
later.
• Once the pre-training phase is complete, the remaining portion 
of records from the dataset is used for incremental training. This 
means that the model is further trained on this additional data, al-
lowing it to gradually improve and adapt to the speciﬁc patterns 
and characteristics of the dataset.
The model is initially pre-trained on a small portion (10%) of the 
dataset, and the remaining records are used for incremental training. 
This process is repeated with increasing proportions for pre-training 
(20%, 30%, 40%, and so on) while the incremental training proportion 
decreases correspondingly.
5. Result & discussions
In the following subsection, we list the tools and system conﬁgura-
tions used to perform the experiments and then discuss the performance 
metrics used for model evaluation. In the next subsection, we validate 
the newly created PhiUSIIL phishing URL dataset. Then, we evaluated 
the URL similarity index-based phishing URL detection phase. Further, 
we evaluated the incremental learning-based second phase of the phish-
ing URL detection model. Finally, we compared the proposed model 
with state-of-the-art models.
5.1. System conﬁguration and tools
All experiments are conducted on a 64-bit Windows 10 Pro, ver-
sion 22H2 operating system equipped with a 2.70 GHz core i7-7500U 
processor, 16 GB RAM, and a 2 GB graphics card. The tools and pro-
gramming languages used are Python 3.8.8 using Jupyter Notebook and 
Java version 17.
5.2. Performance metrics
Performance metrics are used to evaluate the eﬀectiveness and ac-
curacy of a machine learning model’s prediction ability. These metrics 
provide a quantitative measure of how well a machine learning model 
performs, allowing comparisons between diﬀerent models. We have ex-
tensively used these metrics to identify the most suitable incremental 
learning algorithms for the proposed ensemble model, tuning hyper-
parameters, getting feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of the 
proposed machine learning model, and comparing the proposed model 
performance with diﬀerent state-of-the-art machine learning models. 
The following metrics help assess how well the proposed model is per-
forming.
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦=
𝑇p + 𝑇n
𝑇p + 𝑇n + 𝐹p + 𝐹n
(3)
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛=
𝑇p
𝑇p + 𝐹p
(4)
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙=
𝑇p
𝑇p + 𝐹n
(5)
𝐹1𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒= 2 ∗𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛∗𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛+ 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
(6)
𝑀𝐶𝐶=
(𝑇p ∗𝑇n) −(𝐹p ∗𝐹n)
√
(𝑇p + 𝐹p) ∗(𝑇p + 𝐹n) ∗(𝑇n + 𝐹p) ∗(𝑇n + 𝐹n)
(7)
where,
Tp is legitimate URL correctly classiﬁed as legitimate.
Tn is phishing URL correctly classiﬁed as phishing.
Fp is legitimate URL incorrectly classiﬁed as phishing.
Fn is phishing URL incorrectly classiﬁed as legitimate.
5.3. Dataset validation
For any newly constructed dataset, validation is a crucial step to 
ensure that the dataset used to train and evaluate a machine learning 
model is accurate and reliable, leading to more trustworthy and eﬀec-
tive machine learning models. Our dataset validation involves assessing 
its quality and suitability for training and evaluating the machine-
learning models. The following steps are followed to assess the quality 
of the dataset.
URL veriﬁcation: All the URLs in the dataset are collected from 
valid sources and included in the dataset for veriﬁcation.
Null value: There is no null value in the dataset.
Missing value: There is no missing value in the dataset.
Duplicate records: All the records in the dataset are unique.
Zero variance feature: There is no feature in the dataset with iden-
tical data values.
Inﬁnite values: There is no positive or negative inﬁnite value in the 
dataset.
Class imbalance: The dataset has 57% legitimate URLs and 43% 
phishing URLs that do not indicate a disproportionate distribution of 
class labels.
It is important to run the dataset through diverse machine learn-
ing algorithms and establish initial performance metrics to ensure the 
reliability of a dataset. It helps validate the dataset’s suitability for train-
ing and provides a benchmark for future model improvements. If the 
dataset contains errors or biases, the model will also learn and prop-
agate those errors, leading to unreliable and inaccurate predictions. 
Our experiment uses base machine learning algorithms, incremental 
learning algorithms, boosting algorithms, bagging algorithms, voting 


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
12
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Table 3
Performance of various machine learning algorithms on Phishing URL dataset.
Model
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1Score
MCC
Training 
Time
BernoulliNB
0.98644
0.97879
0.9979
0.98826
0.97247
1
PassiveAggressive
0.98021
0.97072
0.9954
0.98291
0.95983
1
SGDClassiﬁer
0.94294
0.91113
0.9975
0.95236
0.88722
2
MultinomialNB
0.68961
0.65277
0.97669
0.78253
0.39829
1
Perceptron
0.98041
0.97039
0.99612
0.98309
0.96027
1
AdaBoost
0.99981
0.99978
0.99989
0.99983
0.99961
13
LightGBM
0.9999
0.99991
0.99993
0.99992
0.99981
1
XGBClassiﬁer
0.99993
0.99993
0.99994
0.99994
0.99985
12
CatBoost
0.99987
0.99981
0.99996
0.99989
0.99974
35
GradientBoosting
0.99978
0.99974
0.99987
0.99981
0.99955
50
Kneighbors
0.99378
0.9933
0.99583
0.99456
0.98729
43
RandomForest
0.99982
0.9998
0.99989
0.99984
0.99963
21
DecisionTree
0.99866
0.99885
0.99881
0.99883
0.99727
2
LogisticRegression
0.99654
0.99712
0.99683
0.99698
0.99294
2
Bagging
0.99923
0.99967
0.99898
0.99932
0.99842
16
Vote_Hard
0.99874
0.99852
0.99928
0.9989
0.99742
83
Vote_Soft
0.99817
0.99802
0.99878
0.9984
0.99625
75
StackingClassiﬁer
0.99979
0.99978
0.99985
0.99981
0.99957
870
Fig. 4. URL similarity index graph.
algorithms, and stacking algorithm to evaluate the dataset. The evalu-
ation result in Table 3 shows that most algorithms generalize well and 
achieve impressive results.
5.4. Evaluation of URL similarity index based phishing URL detection
Phishing URLs generally mimic legitimate URLs, deceiving users into 
thinking they are accessing a legitimate website. Cybercriminals create 
phishing URLs that look similar to legitimate URLs by replacing any 
similar-looking character. In addition, they swap characters, making 
phishing URLs appear identical to the legitimate URL. The proposed 
URL similarity index (USI) technique identiﬁes such tricks by calculat-
ing USI for a URL. We calculate the USI for each URL and analyze them 
based on the following conditions.
• If the USI value is 100, it is identical to a legitimate URL. Hence, 
considered a legitimate URL.
• If USI value is >=80 and <100, it shows that the URL is highly 
identical to a legitimate URL. Hence, such URLs are identiﬁed as 
Phishing URLs.
• Any USI value less than 80 is considered doubtful and passed to the 
machine learning model for further analysis.
During our experiment, we calculated USI value for all the URLs. 
Fig. 4 depicts the graph plotted based on the USI value. Based on the 
above conditions, we were able to detect 7341 phishing URLs correctly.
The experimental result in Table 4 shows how a phishing URL looks 
visually similar to a legitimate URL. Cybercriminals replace a charac-
ter from a legitimate URL with a visually resembled Latin character or 
misspell. These small modiﬁcations by a cybercriminal can trick users 
into believing they are visiting a legitimate website. The URL similarity 
index approach identiﬁes any such misspellings, substituted characters, 
or slight variations in the URL.
5.5. Evaluation of diverse security proﬁle empowered incremental learning 
model
In this subsection, we experimented with the proposed incremen-
tal learning model on the PhiUSIIL dataset. A comprehensive set of 
evaluation metrics is employed to evaluate the performance of the pro-
posed model, including accuracy, precision, sensitivity, F1-score, and 
MCC, which will provide insights into the strengths and limitations of 
diﬀerent proﬁles and their ability to detect phishing URLs accurately. 
Initially, all three algorithms, namely BernoulliNB, PassiveAggressive-
Classiﬁer, and SGDClassiﬁer, are initialized with the ﬁrst records of the 
PhiUSIIL dataset to prevent the model from generating a ‘not ﬁtted yet’ 
exception. The experimental result is presented in Table 5.
Table 6 shows the overall performance of the model in terms of 
True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False Positive (FP), and False 
Positive (FP) organized in a confusion matrix. It represents the counts 
of diﬀerent types of predictions made by the model. The LowSecu-
rity proﬁle gets the lowest Type II error (lowest FN), which shows 
that only one legitimate URL is classiﬁed as phishing. It ensures that 
legitimate URLs are not unnecessarily blocked. While LowSecurity pro-
ﬁle archives highest accuracy of correctly classifying legitimate URL 
(99.9993%), it achieved lowest accuracy of correctly classifying phish-
ing URLs (72.5732%). The HighSecurity proﬁle gets the lowest Type I 
error (lowest FP), which shows that only 27 phishing URLs are classi-
ﬁed as legitimate. It ensures an extra layer of protection that prioritizes 
stringent security measures. While HighSecurity proﬁle archives highest 
accuracy of correctly classifying phishing URLs (99.9733%), it achieved 
lowest accuracy of correctly classifying legitimate URL (95.4898%). Ta-
ble 6 shows that the BestSecurity proﬁle provides improved security 
while maintaining overall acceptable performance.
Further, to get valuable insights into the behavior and performance 
of the proposed incremental learning model, we calculated model learn-
ing rate based on the model’s predictions of each iteration from model 
training. It helps to assess the stability of model’s predictions over time. 
The learning rate value for nth record is calculated based on formula 
given in equation (8)


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
13
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Table 4
Experimental result showing URL similarity based phishing URL detection.
Legitimate URL
Test URL
URL Similarity index
Change in URL
Result
example.com
example.com
100
Same URL
Legitimate
example.com
example..com
91.18457
Latin e with dot below symbol
Phishing
example.com
exam ˙ple.com
90.63361
Latin p with dot above symbol
Phishing
example.com
exa.mple.com
90.08264
Latin a with dot below symbol
Phishing
example.com
e ˙xample.com
89.80716
Latin a with dot below symbol
Phishing
example.com
exampl.com
83.47107
Missing e
Phishing
example.com
exapmle.com
73.27824
Character m and p are swapped
Doubtful
example.com
eaxmple.com
72.17631
Character a and x are swapped
Doubtful
Table 5
Security proﬁle wise performance of the proposed model.
Security Proﬁle
Accuracy
Precision
Sensitivity
F1Score
MCC
Analysis
LowSecurity
0.88258
0.82966
0.99999
0.90690
0.77595
Highest sensitivity
BestSecurity
0.99239
0.98870
0.99810
0.99338
0.98449
Good overall performance
HighSecurity
0.97409
0.99979
0.95490
0.97683
0.94877
Highest precision
Table 6
Confusion matrix showing overall performance of the model.
Security Proﬁle
TP
TN
FP
FN
LowSecurity
134849
73259
27686
1
BestSecurity
134594
99406
1539
256
HighSecurity
128768
100918
27
6082
Fig. 5. LowSecurity proﬁle learning rate.
𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒=
𝑛
∑
𝑖=0
𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛i
𝑛
(8)
A graph is plotted based on the learning rate values in Fig. 5 for 
LowSecurity, Fig. 6 for BestSecurity, and Fig. 7 for HighSecurity proﬁle. 
While comparing the learning rates of diﬀerent security proﬁles, we 
can see there are ﬂuctuations in learning rate for low and high security 
proﬁles, but BestSecurity proﬁle remains stable after rapid learning and 
adaptation from initial training. If the learning rate remains relatively 
constant, it indicates that the model is converging and becoming more 
stable. By observing the BestSecurity learning rate graph, we ﬁnd there 
are no sudden spikes or drops in the learning rate.
5.6. Evaluating the pre-training approach of model performance 
enhancement
In the next experiment, we split the dataset into two parts. The ﬁrst 
part of the split is used to train the model with a classical training ap-
proach where entire training data is used to train the model at once. The 
second part of the dataset is used to test and train the model with the in-
cremental training approach discussed in Section 4.2.2. This approach 
analyzes the model performance when the model is pre-trained with a 
Fig. 6. BestSecurity proﬁle learning rate.
Fig. 7. HighSecurity proﬁle learning rate.
portion of the dataset before going live with incremental training. The 
experimental result is shown in Table 7. Based on the experimental re-
sult, a graph is plotted in Fig. 8 showing the overall performance of 
pre-trained models.
From Fig. 8, it can be concluded that the incremental learning 
model exhibits improved performance as the amount of data used for 
pre-training increases. The model initially undergoes pre-training us-
ing 10% of the dataset, with the remaining 90% used for incremental 
training. This process is then repeated with increasing percentages for 
pre-training (20%, 30%, 40%, and so on). The experimental results in-
dicate that as the record size used for pre-training increases, the model’s 
performance also improves.


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
14
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Fig. 8. Pre-trained model classiﬁcation performance graph.
Table 7
Experimental result when model pre-trained on portion of the dataset.
Split ratio
Accuracy
Precision
Sensitivity
F1Score
MCC
Training Time
10:90
0.99573
0.99439
0.99817
0.99628
0.99128
1286
20:80
0.99593
0.99539
0.9975
0.99644
0.99169
1048
30:70
0.99637
0.99613
0.99753
0.99683
0.99259
721
40:60
0.99708
0.99733
0.99757
0.99745
0.99404
643
50:50
0.99725
0.99733
0.99786
0.9976
0.99439
496
60:40
0.99751
0.99761
0.99803
0.99782
0.99491
317
70:30
0.99755
0.99776
0.99798
0.99787
0.995
232
80:20
0.99763
0.99729
0.99855
0.99792
0.99515
147
90:10
0.99792
0.99791
0.99843
0.99817
0.99577
71
Table 8
Comparison of PhiUSIIL (BestSecurity proﬁle) with state-of-the-art.
Ref.
Legitimate URLs
Phishing URLs
Total URLs
Accuracy
Gupta et al. (2021)
10000
9964
11964
0.9957
Pandey and Mishra (2023)
2700
3500
6200
0.9913
Ahammad et al. (2022)
1500
1500
3000
0.8950
Jain et al. (2022)
2000
2000
4000
0.9385
Alani and Tawﬁk (2022)
58000
30646
88646
0.9750
Ding et al. (2019)
5883
2776
8659
0.9890
Sharma and Singh (2022)
24870
25130
50000
0.9801
Nagunwa et al. (2022)
7530
4271
11801
0.9842
Sameen et al. (2020)
50000
50000
100000
0.9800
Rao et al. (2022)
5438
5076
10514
0.9934
PhiUSIIL
134850
100945
235795
Pre-trained model:
0.9979
Un-Trained model: 0.9924
We have presented the comparative results, including the accuracy 
and details of the dataset used, in Table 8. By comparing the accu-
racy of PhiUSIIL with other studies, it can be concluded that PhiUSIIL 
outperforms the existing state-of-the-art models in detecting phishing 
URLs. Furthermore, the higher accuracy of PhiUSIIL suggests that it is 
more eﬀective in distinguishing between legitimate and phishing URLs, 
thereby reducing the risk of falling victim to phishing attacks.
5.7. Discussions
This work introduces PhiUSIIL, an advanced phishing URL detection 
framework with the objective of constructing a diverse dataset, imple-
menting a URL similarity index and incremental learning approach to 
detect phishing URLs.
The objective of constructing a diverse dataset with 134850 legiti-
mate and 100945 phishing URLs is pivotal for robust machine learning 
in phishing URL detection. This constructed dataset enhances model 
generalization, reduces bias, and improves detection accuracy. Mimick-
ing real-world scenarios equips the model to handle evolving attack 
strategies and ensures its relevance over time, reinforcing its eﬃcacy 
and contributing to cybersecurity advancements. Table 7 shows a di-
rect correlation between the dataset size and the model’s performance 
in phishing URL detection. As we gradually increased the total number 
of records for pre-training (from 10% to 20%, 30%, and beyond), the 
model’s accuracy consistently improved.
This research’s signiﬁcance lies in the introduced URL similarity 
index technique. Visual similarity-based attacks exploit minute URL dif-
ferences, such as zero-width characters, homograph, punycode, homo-
phone, bit squatting, and combosquatting. This technique’s role is vital: 


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
15
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
it detects cybercriminal tactics where visually resembling characters de-
ceive users into accessing malicious sites. Experimentally demonstrating 
the similarity between phishing and legitimate URLs underscores the 
potential risks. Table 4 clearly shows the eﬀectiveness of the URL sim-
ilarity index technique by identifying minute changes in the URL to 
detect phishing URLs. The URL similarity index approach emerges as a 
powerful tool to counteract these subtle yet potent attacks, enhancing 
cybersecurity by unearthing disguised threats and safeguarding users 
against deception.
The proposed diverse security proﬁle integrated with incremental 
learning presents a pivotal advancement in our research. This frame-
work addresses scalability, adaptability, and model staleness prevention 
challenges in phishing URL detection. Through empirical analysis, we 
observe that the BestSecurity proﬁle demonstrates consistent and sta-
ble learning rates. Leveraging readily available data for pre-training 
further improves the model’s resilience and generalization capabilities. 
Our experiment in Table 7 shows that the BestSecurity proﬁle achieves 
enhanced security without compromising overall performance, show-
casing its potential to ensure robust and reliable phishing detection 
while maintaining eﬃciency. The learning rate of BestProﬁle in Fig. 5
shows the model’s stability after initial learning.
Additionally, this research recognizes the limitations of relying on 
URL’s third-party features and underscores the signiﬁcance of incor-
porating contextual information beyond URL features. Additionally, 
diversifying machine learning algorithms highlights a comprehensive 
defense approach.
Collectively, the PhiUSIIL framework exhibits robust scalability and 
adaptability in phishing URL detection. The framework continuously 
updates itself with new data through incremental learning, enabling it 
to adapt to emerging threats without requiring complete retraining. The 
framework’s consistent learning rates ensure steady performance even 
with increased data volume, contributing to its scalability. Adaptability 
is further highlighted by introducing a visual similarity index technique, 
which detects subtle diﬀerences in URLs exploited by visually similar at-
tacks. Moreover, pre-training with available data enhances the model’s 
resilience and capacity to absorb new information, contributing to its 
adaptability.
In summary, this research introduces a substantial data-set compris-
ing 134850 legitimate and 100945 phishing URLs, surpassing existing 
benchmarks. The experimentation achieved a remarkable 99.79% ac-
curacy, outperforming state-of-the-art techniques. This underscores the 
dataset’s eﬃcacy and the potential of the proposed approach for ad-
vanced phishing URL detection.
6. Limitations and future ahead
Despite its potential, the PhiUSIIL framework faces limitations. Con-
tinuous training of PhiUSIIL may introduce the risk of over-training, 
potentially hampering eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness. The extended train-
ing periods could slow down PhiUSIIL’s responsiveness. Moreover, as 
the model continuously adapts to new data, it risks becoming overly 
specialized and less capable of generalization. Exploring strategies to 
mitigate this challenge remains a promising avenue for further research 
and advancement of PhiUSIIL. Further research may include techniques 
such as regularization, discarding redundant training data, and optimiz-
ing continuous training to mitigate this limitation.
Furthermore, the research’s limitation lies in its current extent of 
detecting URLs that distribute executable ﬁles. Further advancement 
is necessary to enhance detection capability to analyze the URLs that 
auto download ﬁles such as .exe, .jar, .bat, .dll, .vbs, .js, .lnk, .sys, .pdf, 
etc. This improvement is crucial to eﬀectively counter evolving cyber 
threats involving malicious URL downloads, ensuring robust cybersecu-
rity measures.
While PhiUSIIL presents a promising approach to phishing URL de-
tection, its vulnerability to potential attacks is another notable limi-
tation. Integrating blockchain technology warrants exploration to en-
hance its security. Block-chain could fortify PhiUSIIL’s defenses against 
adversarial threats, contributing to a more robust and reliable phishing 
detection framework.
7. Conclusion
The article introduces PhiUSIIL, a novel phishing URL detection 
framework designed to combat the ongoing threat of phishing attacks. 
Phishing attacks, which rely on deceptive URLs to trick users into re-
vealing sensitive information or performing harmful actions, pose sig-
niﬁcant risks such as ﬁnancial loss, identity theft, and data compromise. 
The PhiUSIIL framework addresses these challenges by leveraging a 
URL similarity index and incremental learning. The URL similarity in-
dex eﬀectively identiﬁes visually similar attacks, including zero-width 
characters, homograph, punycode, homophone, bit squatting, and com-
bosquatting attacks. This capability enhances the framework’s ability 
to detect sophisticated phishing techniques that rely on visual decep-
tion. Furthermore, PhiUSIIL incorporates incremental learning to adapt 
to the evolving nature of phishing attacks. By continuously updating 
its knowledge base with newly encountered phishing URLs, the frame-
work remains eﬀective and up-to-date against emerging threats. The 
framework utilizes various techniques, such as extracting URL features, 
downloading webpages to extract HTML features, and deriving new 
features from existing information to construct a comprehensive phish-
ing URL dataset. The article provides extensive experimentation and 
evaluation using the PhiUSIIL dataset, which includes both legitimate 
and phishing URLs. In conclusion, the PhiUSIIL phishing URL detection 
framework presents a promising approach to tackle the ongoing threat 
of phishing attacks.
Funding
The authors did not receive support from any organization for the 
submitted work.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Arvind Prasad: Design & development of the framework, data col-
lection, experiments and result analysis.
Shalini Chandra: Revised it critically for important intellectual con-
tent.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
We have shared the link to download the dataset and code at the 
‘Attach File’ step and in the manuscript.
References
Ahammad, S.H., Kale, S.D., Upadhye, G.D., Pande, S.D., Babu, E.V., Dhumane, A.V., Ba-
hadur, M.D.K.J., 2022. Phishing URL detection using machine learning methods. Adv. 
Eng. Softw. 173, 103288. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .advengsoft .2022 .103288.
Alani, M.M., Tawﬁk, H., 2022. PhishNot: a cloud-based machine-learning approach to 
phishing URL detection. Comput. Netw. 218, 109407. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .
comnet .2022 .109407.
Anon, 2023a. Retrieved May, 12, 2023. https://isc .sans .edu /diary /The +zip +gTLD +
Risks +and +Opportunities /29838.
Anon, 2023b. Retrieved May 18, 2023. https://www .malwareworld .com /textlists /
suspiciousDomains .txts.
Anon, 2023c. Retrieved May 16, 2023. https://apwg .org.
Anon, 2023d. Retrieved from October 1, 2022 to May 21, 2023. https://www .phishtank .
com.


Computers & Security 136 (2024) 103545
16
A. Prasad and S. Chandra
Anon, 2023e. Retrieved from October 1, 2022 to May 21, 2023. https://openphish .com.
Anon, 2023f. Retrieved from October 1, 2022 to May 21, 2023. https://www .
malwareworld .com.
Anon, 2023g. Retrieved on October 1, 2023. https://www .domcop .com /top -10 -million -
websites.
Bountakas, P., Xenakis, C., 2023. Helphed: hybrid ensemble learning phishing email de-
tection. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 210, 103545. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jnca .2022 .
103545.
Ding, Y., Luktarhan, N., Li, K., Slamu, W., 2019. A keyword-based combination approach 
for detecting phishing webpages. Comput. Secur. 84, 256–275. https://doi .org /10 .
1016 /j .cose .2019 .03 .018.
Gupta, B.B., Yadav, K., Razzak, I., Psannis, K., Castiglione, A., Chang, X., 2021. A novel 
approach for phishing URLs detection using lexical based machine learning in a 
real-time environment. Comput. Commun. 175, 47–57. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .
comcom .2021 .04 .023.
Huang, Y., Ma, M., 2023. Ill-ids: an incremental lifetime learning ids for vanets. Comput. 
Secur. 124, 102992. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .cose .2022 .102992.
Jain, A.K., Debnath, N., Jain, A.K., 2022. APuML: an eﬃcient approach to detect mo-
bile phishing webpages using machine learning. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 125 (4), 
3227–3248. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s11277 -022 -09707 -w.
Kävrestad, J., Hagberg, A., Nohlberg, M., Rambusch, J., Roos, R., Furnell, S., 2022. 
Evaluation of contextual and game-based training for phishing detection. Future In-
ternet 14 (4), 104. https://doi .org /10 .3390 /ﬁ14040104.
Marooﬁ, S., Korczy´nski, M., Hölzel, A., Duda, A., 2021. Adoption of email anti-spooﬁng 
schemes: a large scale analysis. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 18 (3), 3184–3196. 
https://doi .org /10 .1109 /TNSM .2021 .3065422.
Nagunwa, T., Kearney, P., Fouad, S., 2022. A machine learning approach for detecting fast 
ﬂux phishing hostnames. J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 65, 103125. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .
jisa .2022 .103125.
Nurhas, I., Aditya, B.R., Jacob, D.W., Pawlowski, J.M., 2022. Understanding the chal-
lenges of rapid digital transformation: the case of COVID-19 pandemic in higher edu-
cation. Behav. Inf. Technol. 41 (13), 2924–2940. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /0144929X .
2021 .1962977.
Pandey, P., Mishra, N., 2023. Phish-Sight: a new approach for phishing detection using 
dominant colors on web pages and machine learning. Int. J. Inf. Secur. 1 (11). https://
doi .org /10 .1007 /s10207 -023 -00672 -4.
Prapas, I., Derakhshan, B., Mahdiraji, A.R., Markl, V., 2021. Continuous training and 
deployment of deep learning models. Datenbank Spektrum 21 (3), 203–212. https://
doi .org /10 .1007 /s13222 -021 -00386 -8.
Prasad, A., Chandra, S., 2022a. VMFCVD: an optimized framework to combat volumetric 
DDoS attacks using machine learning. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 47 (8), 9965–9983. https://
doi .org /10 .1007 /s13369 -021 -06484 -9.
Prasad, A., Chandra, S., 2022b. Machine learning to combat cyberattack: a survey of 
datasets and challenges. J. Defense Model. Simul., 15485129221094881. https://doi .
org /10 .1177 /15485129221094881.
Prasad, A., Chandra, S., 2023. BotDefender: a collaborative defense framework against 
botnet attacks using network traﬃc analysis and machine learning. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 
https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s13369 -023 -08016 -z.
Purwanto, R.W., Pal, A., Blair, A., Jha, S., 2022. PhishSim: aiding phishing website detec-
tion with a feature-free tool. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 17, 1497–1512. https://
doi .org /10 .1109 /TIFS .2022 .3164212.
Rao, R.S., Umarekar, A., Pais, A.R., 2022. Application of word embedding and machine 
learning in detecting phishing websites. Telecommun. Syst., 1–13. https://doi .org /
10 .1007 /s11235 -021 -00850 -6.
Rupa, C., Srivastava, G., Bhattacharya, S., Reddy, P., Gadekallu, T.R., 2021. A machine 
learning driven threat intelligence system for malicious URL detection. In: Proceed-
ings of the 16th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, 
pp. 1–7.
Sáez-de-Cámara, X., Flores, J.L., Arellano, C., Urbieta, A., Zurutuza, U., 2023. Clustered 
federated learning architecture for network anomaly detection in large scale hetero-
geneous IoT networks. Comput. Secur. 131, 103299. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .cose .
2023 .103299.
Sahingoz, O.K., Buber, E., Demir, O., Diri, B., 2019. Machine learning based phishing 
detection from URLs. Expert Syst. Appl. 117, 345–357. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .
eswa .2018 .09 .029.
Sameen, M., Han, K., Hwang, S.O., 2020. PhishHaven – an eﬃcient real-time ai phish-
ing URLs detection system. IEEE Access 8, 83425–83443. https://doi .org /10 .1109 /
ACCESS .2020 .2991403.
Sharma, B., Singh, P., 2022. An improved anti-phishing model utilizing TF-IDF and Ad-
aBoost. Concurr. Comput., Pract. Exp. 34 (26), e7287. https://doi .org /10 .1002 /cpe .
7287.
Shih, W.C., Yang, C.T., Jiang, C.T., Kristiani, E., 2023. Implementation and visualization 
of a netﬂow log data lake system for cyberattack detection using distributed deep 
learning. J. Supercomput. 79 (5), 4983–5012. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s11227 -022 -
04802 -y.
Srijayanthi, S., Sethukarasi, T., 2023. Design of privacy preserving model based on clus-
tering involved anonymization along with feature selection. Comput. Secur. 126, 
103027. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .cose .2022 .103027.
Taha, A., 2021. Intelligent ensemble learning approach for phishing website detection 
based on weighted soft voting. Mathematics 9 (21), 2799. https://doi .org /10 .3390 /
math9212799.
Unal, D., Hammoudeh, M., Khan, M.A., Abuarqoub, A., Epiphaniou, G., Hamila, R., 2021. 
Integration of federated machine learning and blockchain for the provision of secure 
big data analytics for Internet of things. Comput. Secur. 109, 102393. https://doi .
org /10 .1016 /j .cose .2021 .102393.
Verma, R., Chandra, S., 2023. RepuTE: a soft voting ensemble learning framework for 
reputation-based attack detection in fog-IoT milieu. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 118, 
105670. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .engappai .2022 .105670.
Wei, W., Ke, Q., Nowak, J., Korytkowski, M., Scherer, R., Wo´zniak, M., 2020. Accurate 
and fast URL phishing detector: a convolutional neural network approach. Comput. 
Netw. 178, 107275. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .comnet .2020 .107275.
Wen, T., Xiao, Y., Wang, A., Wang, H., 2023. A novel hybrid feature fusion model 
for detecting phishing scam on Ethereum using deep neural network. Expert Syst. 
Appl. 211, 118463. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .eswa .2022 .118463.
Xiao, Y., Liu, L., Ma, Z., Wang, Z., Meng, W., 2021. Defending co-resident attack us-
ing reputation-based virtual machine deployment policy in cloud computing. Trans. 
Emerg. Telecommun. Technol. 32 (9), e4271. https://doi .org /10 .1002 /ett .4271.
Zhang, W., Jiang, Q., Chen, L., Li, C., 2017. Two-stage ELM for phishing web pages detec-
tion using hybrid features. World Wide Web 20, 797–813. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /
s11280 -016 -0418 -9.
Arvind Prasad is pursuing PhD in Computer Science from the Department of Com-
puter Science, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow, UP. His research 
interest includes cybersecurity, IoT, reverse engineering, network traﬃc analysis, and 
machine learning.
Shalini Chandra is an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science at 
the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow, UP. Her research area is software 
security, software quality, cloud computing, and IoT.


