# 4. 연구논문_Automatic recognition system for concrete cracks with support vector machine based on crack features

---
**Source:** [[4. 연구논문_Automatic recognition system for concrete cracks with support vector machine based on crack features.pdf]]
**Category:** #mba #ai
**Imported:** 2026-03-05

1
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Automatic recognition system 
for concrete cracks with support 
vector machine based on crack 
features
Rui Wang 1, Rui‑Qi Chen 1, Xin‑Xin Guo 2*, Jia‑Xuan Liu 1 & Hai‑Ying Yu 1
Cracks are a common problem in concrete surfaces. With the continuous optimization of machine 
vision-based inspection systems, effective crack detection and recognition is the core of the entire 
system. In this study, support vector machine (SVM) was used to distinguish cracks from other 
regions. To complete the recognition system of the SVM, a framework consisting of an image 
processing and recognition model was proposed. An algorithm combining the Prewitt operator with 
the Otsu threshold was proposed for image segmentation. The binary image processed by the new 
algorithm combined with mathematical morphology can result in a more complete crack zone and 
fewer interference regions. After the initial parameter extraction, most of the impurity areas were 
screened by preliminary discrimination, removing 99% of the impurities. This processing step ensured 
the balance and effectiveness of the samples. To establish an automatic identification model based 
on SVM with a radial basis function, compactness, occupancy rate, and length–width ratio were 
selected as input parameters after comparing these three features with all six features of the crack. 
The recognition accuracy of this system reaches 97.14%, demonstrating that the proposed method is 
effective and satisfies practical requirements.
Keywords  Machine vision, Crack recognition, Image segmentation, Initial screening, Support vector 
machine (SVM)
Concrete is one of the most widely used materials in civil engineering, and cracking is the most common 
problem of ­concrete1–3. In the field of civil engineering, concrete surface cracking due to creep, shrinkage, 
and loading is an inevitable ­problem4,5. The continuous development of cracks can cause harmful chemical 
infiltration, leakage, carbonation, and spalling and can even reduce the bearing capacity and service performance 
of the structure. Therefore, early detection of concrete cracks is necessary. Practically, traditional detection 
involves manual tracing and recording of cracks using simple ­tools6,7. The major drawbacks of the traditional 
method are as follows: (1) Inefficiency, time-consuming, and ­laborious8. In the traditional detection method, 
inspectors walk along the surface of the structure to observe and record cracks. According to the relevant Chinese 
maintenance specifications, most projects require periodic inspection, and each structure should be described 
quantitatively according to cracks and other defects. This leads to heavy inspection work in addition to the 
vastness of contemporary engineering. (2) Low accuracy. In conventional detection, the crack width is usually 
described quantitatively by some individual points. However, other parameters, including the number, length, 
and position of cracks, can only be ­approximated8. The accuracy of the inspection results mainly depends on the 
experience and work attitude of the inspectors. The crack-development process is difficult to track and evaluate. 
(3) Unsafety. Conventional detection procedures rely on visual inspection and personal visits to physical sites 
of severe and observable damage, which not only leads to repeatable and unreliable results with high labor costs 
but also includes numerous safety problems. Some detection environments require inspectors to stay inside 
for a long time, and sometimes they need to climb up. When inspection requires a manlift, it may cause road 
closures, reducing inspector and public ­safety9. Therefore, traditional detection methods could be dangerous.
Currently, acoustic emission, microwave and image are the main signal sources used for identification in 
structural health monitoring (SHM) 10–14. Among them, the higher the sampling frequency of acoustic emission, 
the richer the information of the detected signals, but at the same time, it will increase the difficulty of collecting, 
OPEN
1College of Engineering, Sichuan Normal University, Chengdu 610068, China. 2College of Environment and Civil 
Engineering, Chengdu University of Technology, Chengdu 610059, China. *email: zj_gxinxin@163.com


2
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
storing and processing the amount of data 15. Microwave non-destructive testing techniques can result in poor 
spatial resolution due to factors such as spacing variations and irregularities in the detection area 16. It can 
be found that the characteristics of the sensors that collect the various types of signals have a great impact 
on the results of SHM. And with the development of low-cost, high-quality imaging sensors and significant 
improvements in machine vision technology, image-based SHM has received increasing attention and has become 
a key component of SHM systems for civil infrastructure 17.
The machine vision-based nondestructive, rapid, and safe automated crack detection method has been applied 
in many fields, including ­bridges18,19, ­tunnels20–22, and ­pavements23. Compared to the efficiency of crack image 
acquisition, image processing and crack recognition are mostly semi-automatic and time-consuming due to 
the complexity and inadaptability of the algorithm. With continuous development, image processing primarily 
involves denoising, threshold segmentation, edge detection, and penetration models. Many image processing 
techniques have been developed for the detection of cracks, contributing to the automation of the survey sys-
tem. This is a scientific field with constant ­innovations24–27. Fujita et al.28 first used subtraction preprocessing to 
remove minor variations, including uneven illumination and shading. Then, a Hessian matrix filter was used 
for image enhancement, and Otsu’s thresholding was used to distinguish cracks from the background. Yu et al.29 
applied Sobel and Laplacian operators to detect crack edges after neighborhood averaging of the image, and then 
Gaussian filter was used to remove noise, and the Dijkstra method was used to identify the cracks. Lee et al.30 
and Oh et al.31 subtracted the smoothed image processed by a median filter from the original image to detect 
cracks in the shadows and used a filter for removing isolated points, then applied morphological operations to 
obtain the connected cracks, and divided the crack image into several regions and selected a seed point in each 
region to trace the crack. Yamaguchi et al.32 proposed percolation-based image processing for crack detection and 
consulted the sequential similarity detection algorithm and active search (SSDA) to reduce computation time. 
Halfawy et al.33 considered gray-level intensity and designed an efficient algorithm based on the combination 
of the Sobel operator and the Hough transform to detect cracks in the sewer. Hao et al.34 proposed an improved 
neuron segmentation model that includes a robust crack indicator function and iterative contour evolution. 
Gao et al.35 used the logarithmic transform for image enhancement and applied the modified differential box-
counting algorithm to detect cracks. Kaddah et al.26 proposed an optimized minimal path s election method for 
robust and efficient crack segmentation within gray-level pavement images according to the benchmarking of the 
methods. Huang et al.36 developed a new approach for crack segmentation using compressed image data based 
on the compressive sensing (CS) framework and generative models. In summary, an effective image segmenta-
tion algorithm is usually regarded as the foundation for crack recognition; however, some image segmentation 
methods are complicated. In this study, an improved algorithm that combines crack edges with the Otsu method 
was proposed.
After image processing techniques, the two main steps are crack feature extraction and classifier design. 
The features used for crack identification were relatively concentrated, especially in terms of width and length. 
Moreover, some features, including the area and direction, have been described in some studies. Neural networks 
37,38, and support vector machines (SVM) 39–44 have been widely used for designing classifiers. For example, Li 38 
used the BP neural network (BPNN) for the automatic recognition of road crack images and proposed a complete 
image processing algorithm framework, including image preprocessing and crack information extraction, with 
an accuracy of 88% for longitudinal crack images. Cha proposed a fully automated visual detection method for 
loose bolts using the Viola-Jones algorithm and ­SVM44 with an accuracy of 97%. Recognition accuracy is related 
not only to the selection of classifiers but also to feature selection. Improving the reliability and accuracy of results 
remains an ongoing effort in this research area.
The SVM outperformed the BPNN when dealing with small samples. Moreover, SVM uses only support vec-
tors when dealing with nonlinear situations, whereas BPNN grows exponentially with increasing dimensionality. 
Therefore, SVM with a radial basis function (RBF-SVM) was applied in this study to develop a recognition model 
for cracks and non-cracks. Its accuracy reaches 97.14%, making it a promising alternative to assist maintenance 
agencies with periodic detection. The subsequent sections of this paper are as follows. “Framework of crack 
image processing and recognition” provides a framework for the crack-image processing and recognition process. 
“Image processing” introduces the image processing methods, including image preprocessing, segmentation, 
and morphological processing. “Information extraction and Initial screening” includes the feature extraction 
and preliminary screening of impurity areas. “SVM classification model” establishes the SVM-based automatic 
crack recognition model. Conclusions and future work are stated in the last section.
Framework of crack image processing and recognition
In this section, crack image processing and recognition framework is proposed (Fig. 1). This can be divided into 
three parts: image processing, information extraction, and an automatic recognition model.
First, image grayscaling was applied to process the original color image. Second, image preprocessing was 
performed to remove unnecessary information and highlight the features of the crack. Third, an improved algo-
rithm was adopted for image binarization to distinguish the subject from the background. Finally, binary images 
were processed via morphological processing. Among these, image binarization is critical, and a more adaptable 
image segmentation is recommended for the convenience and accuracy of crack information extraction.
To provide sample data for the recognition model, it is necessary to extract the parameters of the target regions 
(crack and non-crack) after image processing. After morphological analysis and feature selection, the impurity 
area was preliminarily screened to improve the effectiveness of samples and processing efficiency.
As the core of crack recognition, feature selection is a critical issue in the field of machine learning and pat-
tern recognition. Therefore, the recognition model component includes the establishment of an automatic crack 
recognition model and the second feature selection based on the recognition results.


3
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Image processing
A. Grayscale process
The collected color image is composed of three color parameters, RGB (red, green, and blue), as shown in Eq. (1). 
Each parameter ranges from 0 to 255, representing different saturation levels. In the concrete crack image, the 
crack area was darker than the background. In this study, a 24-bit RGB tricolor color image ranging from 0 to 
255 was converted into a black-and-white image of 8 Gy ­values45.
where Y is the brightness, R is the red value, G is the green value, and B is the blue value.
B. Image preprocessing
Filters are usually applied for image enhancement. Filtering serves two functions: selecting a specific signal 
frequency to determine which content will be passed or not passed in the output and suppressing noise 
interference. The commonly used image smoothing algorithms include the Wiener filter, neighborhood average 
method, and median filter method. Considering the crack edge, an important feature of cracks, the adaptive 
mean filtering algorithm was applied to obtain a smoothed image from the original image for both denoising 
and image details. The adaptive median filter dynamically changes the window size of the filter according to the 
preset ­conditions46. This filtering algorithm has the following advantages: first, the window size is automatically 
increased to improve the denoising ability with strong detected noise; second, with weak detected noise, the 
window size is not increased, which not only reflects self-adaptability, but also reduces time and improves speed; 
third, the points unaffected by impulse noise need no modification, which protects the details and boundary 
information of the image. The processing effect is displayed in Fig. 2. The steps are as follows:
(1)	
The mean and standard deviation of the pixel values within the filter window were calculated for each pixel 
point.
(2)	
 If the difference between the pixel value and mean value of a pixel point is less than or equal to a certain 
threshold, the point is considered to be in a low-noise region, and the pixel value of the point is taken as the 
output. Conversely, the point is considered to be in a high-noise region, and the filter window is enlarged 
to filter again.
(3)	
If the selected filter window exceeds the maximum value, the pixel value of the point is directly output; 
otherwise, steps (1) and (2) are repeated.
C. Image segmentation
Image binarization involves setting the gray value of the pixels in the image to 0 or 255, resulting in an obvious 
black-and-white effect on the image. Image segmentation is based on two features: discontinuity and similarity. 
Because the gray value of the crack area is low and that of the background is high, a suitable threshold can be 
(1)
Y = 0.333R + 0.333G + 0.333B
Fig. 1.   Crack detection framework based on image processing.
Fig. 2.   Example of applying adaptive median algorithm: (a) the gray image, (b) the result using adaptive 
median filter.


4
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
found to separate the crack from the background and achieve image binarization. The threshold is assumed as 
T. If the gray value of the current pixel is less than T, it is set as a dark point; otherwise, it is set as a bright point, 
as shown in Eq. (2) 29.
The Otsu method is widely used to obtain the threshold T owing to its simplicity and fast processing speed. 
However, it is not suitable for "multi-interference" crack images because it may result in under-segmentation of 
images with small cracks and over-segmentation of images with different backgrounds or uneven illumination. 
Considering that the edges of the target region in an image are locations where the gray level of the neighboring 
pixels varies significantly, its discontinuity can be represented by the gradient. Therefore, in this study, a method 
that combines the gradient operator and the Otsu method for image segmentation was proposed to obtain better 
segmentation results.
(1)	
 The improved method gradient-Otsu algorithm
	
  An image is defined as a two-dimensional function f(x,y) and its gradient is defined as Eq. (3),
its amplitude value in (x, y) is as Eq. (4),
	
  Prewitt operator was used to calculate Gx and Gy, as shown in Fig. 3.
	
  The steps of the proposed gradient Otsu algorithm are as follows:
	
  Step 1: the gradient of image f(x,y) was calculated, and the calculated M(x,y) using Eq. (4) is stored in a 
new two-dimensional matrix M.
	
  Step2: using the histogram segmentation method to binarize gradient matrix M, results in a binary matrix 
g(x,y) containing 0 and 1.
	
  Step3: the original image f(x,y) was multiplied by the corresponding element of matrix g(x, y), and a new 
image matrix N is obtained: N = f. × g. In the new image, the pixel values of the original image are displayed 
at positions representing 1 in the matrix g(x, y), whereas the pixel values at the remaining positions are 0.
	
  Step4: The Otsu method was used to calculate the threshold T of the N-image, and T was used for the 
segmentation of the image f(x, y) to obtain the binary image.
(2)	
(2) Test effect
	
  Otsu is a widely used and representative algorithm for image segmentation, and the improved algorithm 
was compared with Otsu to illustrate its adaptability. The processing results are listed in three groups 
(Fig. 4). Column (b) represents the results of the Otsu threshold, and column (c) represents the results of the 
Gradient-Otsu algorithm. For the former two groups, the crack backgrounds have extensive non-uniformity 
due to light and surface wear. The crack and background were effectively separated, and the impurity region 
was significantly reduced in column (c). The third image represents many crossing cracks. As the water 
seepage is around cracks and its gray value is between that of the crack and the background, the grayscale of 
the background is uneven, which may cause over-segmentation. The Otsu results in column (b) show that 
the water seepage zone is mixed with cracks that could not be identified using this method, while column 
(c) demonstrates that the segmentation method is more effective. The processed results demonstrate that 
the proposed Gradient-Otsu algorithm is efficient and performs well.
D. Morphological image processing
After enhancement and binarization, the binary image still contains some noise points, which are distributed in 
small areas around the cracks. Simultaneously, there may be edge burr and inner cavity in the crack zones (Fig. 5). 
Morphological image processing based on mathematical theory was used to delete the noise spots and fill holes.
Proper mathematical morphology operations can remove speckles from the image, maintain the crack 
morphology, and optimize the image integrity of the image. The closure operation was performed on the binary 
crack image according to Eq. (5), with expansion followed by corrosion. The processing effect is shown in Fig. 6.
(2)
g(i, j) =

0,
255,
if f (i, j) ≤T
otherwise
(3)
∇f = grad(f ) =
 Gx
Gy

(4)
M(x, y) = mag(∇f ) =

G2x + G2y
z1
z2
z3
z4
z5
z6
z7
z8
z9
-1
-1
-1
0
0
0
1
1
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 3.   Prewitt operator schematic diagram: (a) image neighborhood, (b) Gx = (z7 + z8 + z9) − (z1 + z2 + z3), (c) 
Gy = (z3 + z6 + z9) − (z1 + z4 + z7).


5
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Information extraction and Initial screening
A. Information extraction
The purpose of image processing is to simplify image information. The design of the crack automatic crack 
recognition program is based on the difference between the cracks and the non-cracks. Therefore, certain char-
acteristics must be selected for the quantitative description of cracks. The purpose of extracting concrete crack 
features includes two aspects: recording diseases and distinguishing non-cracks, corresponding to the "statistics" 
and "recognition" of the recognition system. Compared with non-crack, crack is most directly described as long 
(5)
F · B = (F ⊕B) ⊖B
Fig. 4.   Test results: (a) the original image, (b) Otsu threshold, (c) gradient-Otsu.
Fig. 5.   Distribution of holes and noise.
Fig. 6.   Results after close operation.


6
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
and thin, therefore, length and width are most commonly extracted. Several studies have been conducted on crack 
feature analysis. Jahanshahi et al.47 adopted five features for further analysis: eccentricity, area, solidity, absolute 
value of the correlation coefficient, and compactness. Yu et al. 29 and Lee et al.30 selected the length, width and 
direction of the crack. Li et al.38 selected the minimum external rectangle of the major part of the crack and the 
cracking rate of the image for recognition. Ukai measured the following eight features to reflect the difference 
between crack and noise: area, Feret’s occupancy rate, maximum diagram width, complicated degree, maximum 
Pythagoras length, maximum vertical width, maximum occupancy rate, and minimum diagram width.
Based on previous studies, some representative and comprehensive features were selected for extraction. Pixel 
is the basic element of crack information extraction. The selected feature parameters of regions are as follows:
(1)	
Area (A): the actual area is the product of the pixel number, merely corresponding to the pixel, as shown 
in Eq. (6). Here, µ is a constant coefficient, and N represents A.
where N is the number of pixels forming the region and µ is the scale of the image.
(2)	
Perimeter (p): the perimeter is determined by the number of pixels of the skeleton boundary. After calculat-
ing the length of each diagonal line as 
√
2 , and the vertical and horizontal lines as one, the real perimeter 
was calculated using Eq. (7). Here, n +
√
2m represents the perimeter.
where n is the number of pixels in the vertical and horizontal lines, and m is the number of pixels in the 
diagonal lines.
(3)	
Mean width (w): the width of each region was calculated using Eq. (8),
where N is from Eq. (6), and n and m are from Eq. (7).
(4)	
Compactness (com) is the measurement of describing the regional compactness of a region. It is defined 
as the ratio of the square root area to the perimeter, as shown in Eq. (9). It reaches 1 in a perfectly circular 
object and approaches 0 in thin complex objects.
(5)	
Length–width ratio of the region’s minimum enclosing rectangle (r). The ratio of crack is generally higher 
than that of non-crack.
(6)	
 Occupancy rate (occ). Occupancy rate is the proportion of pixels representing the interested region in its 
minimum rectangle. The proportion of the crack region was significantly smaller than that of the non-crack 
region.
The sample information is shown in Table 1 (including crack and non-crack).
(6)
A = Nµ2
(7)
p = (n +
√
2m)µ
(8)
w = 2A/p = N/(n +
√
2m)
(9)
com = 2
√
Aπ/p
Table 1.   Part of the samples.
No
A
p
w
com
occ
r
1
13
15.1
1.72
0.717
0.464
1.75
2
7802
4007
3.89
0.006
0.013
2.2
3
7
8.8
1.59
1.136
0.583
1.33
4
44,796
2185.5
40.99
0.118
0.438
1.14
5
9013
2165.7
8.32
0.024
0.025
1.43
6
2824
1644
3.44
0.013
0.081
15.87
7
67
35.8
3.74
0.657
0.465
1
8
5
7.4
1.35
1.147
0.625
2
9
3369
3155
2.14
0.004
0.048
28.28
10
34,379
2553
26.93
0.066
0.067
1.23
11
6741
3374.6
4
0.007
0.025
6.62
12
136
59.1
4.6
0.489
0.463
1.5
13
6762
2266
5.97
0.017
0.073
10.74
14
6551
1860
7.04
0.024
0.058
5.54
15
20
18.5
2.16
0.734
0.556
2.25
16
21
20.5
2.05
0.628
0.438
1.33


7
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
B. Initial screening
Despite processing of the binary image, the number of non-cracks was significantly higher than the cracks. 
Statistics indicate that the number of non-cracks exceeds 92%, which is detrimental to the sample effectiveness 
and recognition efficiency. Compared to crack, noise is discrete, with a smaller area, lower compactness, and 
higher occupation rate (Fig. 7a). To optimize samples and reduce subsequent work, the collected samples were 
screened initially. Statistical analysis of the test revealed the following selected reference standards and order: (1) 
Compactness, (2) Occupancy rate, and (3) Area. The mean-width k of the remaining regions was calculated after 
the first two steps, and the appropriate multiple of k was taken as the threshold value of the area. Here, com = 0.15, 
r = 0.3, and A = 6*k. The screening results of some images are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 7b.
Table 2 shows the high efficiency of this screening method, for example, the screening rate of sample 6 can 
reach 99.85%. These results verify the validity of the selected parameter standards and the necessity of initial 
screening. The sample statistics of regions after the initial screening were used for the recognition model. After 
this treatment, the number of cracks and non-cracks was balanced, and the subsequent work was reduced with 
an effectively established identification model.
SVM classification model
SVM
SVM is particularly effective for the foundation of statistical learning theory. To reduce the error upper limit of 
the generalized model, a unique principle called structural risk minimization (SRM) principle was ­used48. SVM 
has the following advantages:
(1)	
For the case of finite samples, SVM can obtain an optimal solution based on the available information 
without the need for infinite samples.
(2)	
The algorithm is eventually transformed into a quadratic optimization problem and reaches the global 
optimal point theoretically.
(3)	
For the nonlinear case, the SVM maps the training data into a higher-dimensional feature space to make the 
input data linearly separable. Therefore, the hyperplane that optimally separates the dataset can be found 
(Fig. 8).
Fig. 7.   Results of early screening: (a) before screening, (b) after screening.
Table 2.   Statistics of early screening. Effective ratio = (region number before screening − region number after 
screening)/region number before screening × 100%.
No
Region number before screening
Region number after screening
Effective ratio (%)
1
524
7
98.66
2
21
1
95.24
3
1023
9
99.12
4
507
1
99.80
5
1380
6
99.57
6
654
1
99.85
7
3
1
66.67
8
183
3
98.36
9
37
1
97.30
10
842
2
99.76


8
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
The radial basis function (RBF) has local properties that accurately capture the local features of data compared 
to other kernel functions, improving the accuracy of classification or regression. It also has smoothness by 
introducing a Gaussian distribution to represent the similarity of data points as a continuous value, which reduces 
the impact of outliers on classification or regression results. It maps each data point to a high-dimensional space, 
making linear separation possible, which can accommodate samples of high or low dimensions, large or small 
sizes, and has a wide convergence domain. For such nonlinear situations, RBF can be used to transform samples 
from low to high dimensions, and SVM can be used to find a hyperplane between the data that separates the two 
types of samples. RBF can be expressed using Eq. (10).
It reflects the similarity between two vectors determined by the parameter γ(γ>0) and the distance between 
the coordinate points of the two vectors. RBF reflects the relationship between vector similarity and distance 
between two points (Fig. 9). When γ is determined, the larger the distance between the two points, the closer 
the similarity is to 0, and the similarity is closer to 1 when the distance is smaller. The smaller the value of γ , the 
flatter the image, while a larger value results in narrower images. Therefore, γ can amplify or reduce the similarity 
between data points, which can be reflected in RBF-SVM to represent the difficulty of data being hyperplane 
partitioned.
After dimensioning the features using RBF, the kernel function is equivalent to the inner product of the 
two mapping functions. This mapping function does not need to be manually pointed out because the result of 
the inner product of two mapping functions can be represented by a kernel function, shortening the operation 
process. In optimization problems, mapping functions appear in pairs, indicating that kernel functions can 
replace them wherever they appear, as shown in Eq. (11). The quadratic programming problem corresponding 
to parameter optimization is transformed into a minimization problem.
Therefore, the final fitting result should also be represented by high-dimensional vectors, and the optimal 
function was calculated using Eq. (12).
(10)
K(Xi, Xj) = exp(−γ Xi −Xj2)
min
ai
n
i=1
n
j=1yiyjaiajexp(−γ Xi −Xj2) −
n
i=1ai(i = 1,2, 3..., n)
(11)
s.t.
n
i=1yiai = 0, 0 ≤ai ≤C
(12)
f (X) = sign
n
i=1

aiyiexp(−γ Xi −Xj2 + b

Fig. 8.   An example of optimal hyperplane.
Fig. 9.   RBF function image.


9
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
B. Modeling and analysis
Among the six features, area, perimeter, and mean width are scalar, while compactness, occupancy rate, and the 
length–width ratio of the external rectangle are ratio values. Therefore, under different conditions, like shooting 
distances and angles, the influence on the former three is significant compared to the latter three; the latter three 
features exhibit great stability. Therefore, compactness, occupancy rate, and length–width ratio were selected as 
the input features of the classification model, whereas area, perimeter, and mean width were used to quantify 
cracks. The model based on these six features was compared with the model based on the latter three features. 
Considering that the data in this study were collected under the same conditions, if the accuracy corresponding 
to the six parameters is lower than that of the latter, the stability and reliability of the latter three features can 
also be verified.
The flow chart of SVM is shown in Fig. 10.
In the remaining regions, inspectors labeled cracks as 1 and non-cracks as 0. A total of 120 samples, including 
55 crack and 65 non-crack, were used in the model. Out of the total, 50 samples were used as training data (25 
crack and 25 non-crack), while the remaining samples were used as test data. To avoid additional discrepancies 
due to the large range of data, the data were normalized before processing by SVM, as Eq. (13),
where xj(min) and xj(max) are represent the minimum and maximum values of the jth variable of total samples. 
Normalized sample data range is between 0 and  1 (Table 3).
The key parameters of RBF-SVM include the penalty factor c and kernel parameter γ. Several studies indicate 
that the generalization performance of RBF-SVM is sensitive to model parameters. An extremely high c can 
lead to an over-learning state, resulting in a significantly higher classification accuracy of the training set 
and a significantly lower classification accuracy of the test set. Therefore, c and γ should be selected using the 
(13)
x′
ij =
xij −xj(min)
xj(max) −xj(min)
Fig. 10.   Flow chart of the SVM-RBF classification model.
Table 3.   Sample data.
No
label
Area
Perimeter
Mean width
Compactness
Occupancy rate
External rectangle
1
1
0.0551
0.4791
0.0358
0.0000
0.1486
1.0000
2
1
0.1075
0.2787
0.1835
0.1380
0.1834
0.1664
3
1
0.1110
0.3415
0.1511
0.0868
0.2345
0.3571
4
1
0.0461
0.2452
0.0749
0.0627
0.2611
0.5452
5
1
0.5661
0.3859
0.7819
0.4381
0.2142
0.0084
6
1
0.1281
0.6109
0.0887
0.0131
0.0298
0.0439
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
115
0
0.0014
0.0061
0.0405
1.0000
0.6298
0.0183
116
0
0.0312
0.1010
0.1341
0.3066
0.6385
0.0034
117
0
0.0254
0.1128
0.0913
0.1941
0.5741
0.0503
118
0
0.0056
0.0217
0.0825
0.7890
0.5511
0.0096
119
0
1.0000
0.5405
1.0000
0.3970
0.4354
0.0163
120
0
0.0019
0.0094
0.0441
0.8602
0.5934
0.0153


10
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
cross-validation method, that is, within a certain range for the highest recognition rate, the smallest c is selected. 
The optimal parameters selected through cross-validation were used in testing. The results are shown in Table 4.
The results is discussed from three perspectives:
(1)	
Recognition accuracy: the recognition rate of the former classifier was 84.29%, which was lower than that 
of the latter one (97.14%).
(2)	
Iterations: the number of iterations of the former was 1.4 (14/10) times that of the latter one.
(3)	
Running time: the running time of the former was 1.21 (4.98/4.13) times that of the latter one.
This demonstrates that ineffective input feature selection, that is, the unconditional selection of more input 
parameters, will not improve recognition accuracy, but the operational complexity will be increased. Moreover, 
the area, perimeter, and mean width were not uniform when the shooting conditions changed, necessitating 
extensive data conversion before using these parameters. Therefore, the allocation and application of the crack 
characteristics are critical. The three parameters used in this study can achieve better results. The method pro-
posed in this study is more effective than the crack-identification methods used in previous studies, and the 
results are acceptable for engineering applications (Table 5).
Conclusions
This study concentrates on machine vision-based automatic crack detection and recognition systems for concrete 
surfaces. A comprehensive framework comprising primarily image processing, information extraction of regions, 
and the SVM-RBF model is proposed.
(1)	
 In image processing, an image segmentation method combining the edge gradient with Otsu, called the 
gradient-Otsu algorithm, was proposed. The results demonstrated that the improved method exhibited 
significant adaptability, and the treatment effect was significantly improved compared to Otsu.
(2)	
 To balance crack and non-crack samples and reduce the calculation amount of subsequent processing, 
preliminary screening of samples is recommended. Based on compactness, occupancy rate, and area, the 
total screening rate reaches close to 99%, demonstrating the efficiency of the selected parameter standards..
(3)	
The RBF-SVM was used to develop the recognition model, in which a cross-validation method was used 
for parameter optimization. The compactness, occupancy rate, and aspect ratio were selected to form the 
sample set of the recognition model. The recognition accuracy reaches 97.14%, making it suitable for engi-
neering applications. The results demonstrate that compactness, occupancy rate, and external rectangle are 
more effective in detecting cracks than area, perimeter, and average width because they are more stable at 
different photo angles and distances. Therefore, the crack information should be selected rationally.
In this article, a model using RBF-SVM was established and verified the importance of selecting features 
reasonably from the perspective of crack recognition. The identified cracks and quantitative parameters can be 
combined to evaluate the health status of concrete structures, based on which engineering maintenance can be 
carried out. This is also the direction that our work can contribute to. Meanwhile, due to the enormous poten-
tial of deep learning in the field of crack recognition in recent years, we will explore crack recognition methods 
based on deep learning in future work. This will help us to have a more comprehensive understanding of the 
characteristics of cracks and improve the accuracy and robustness of crack identification.
Table 4.   Output results.
All six inputs
Later three inputs
The number of iterations
14
10
Recognition  accuracy (%)
84.29
97.14
Table 5.   The accuracy of some crack identification methods.
Researcher
Methods
Accuracy (%)
Wang R
RBF-SVM
97.14
Li
SVM
78
Lee J
PNN
94.14
Lee, J. H.
Sobel
87.3
Canny
89.3
Morphology
94.1


11
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Data availability
The data are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Received: 4 March 2024; Accepted: 23 August 2024
References
	 1.	 Liang, D., Zhou, X.-F., Wang, S. & Liu, C.-J. Research on concrete cracks recognition based on dual convolutional neural network. 
KSCE J. Civ. Eng. 23(7), 3066–3074 (2019).
	 2.	 Amin, M., Agwa, I. S., Mashaan, N., Mahmood, S. & Abd-Elrahman, M. H. Investigation of the physical mechanical properties 
and durability of sustainable ultra-high performance concrete with recycled waste glass. Sustainability 15, 4 (2023).
	 3.	 Mohtasham Moein, M., A. Saradar, K. Rahmati, S. H. Ghasemzadeh Mousavinejad, J. Bristow, V. Aramali and M. Karakouzian, 
"Predictive models for concrete properties using machine learning and deep learning approaches: A review," Journal of Building 
Engineering, vol. 63, 2023.
	 4.	 Kumar, P., Batchu, S., Swamy, N. & Kota, S. R. Real-time concrete damage detection using deep learning for high rise structures. 
IEEE Access 9, 112312–112331 (2021).
	 5.	 Gupta, P. & Dixit, M. Image-based crack detection approaches: A comprehensive survey. Multimed. Tools Appl. 81(28), 40181–40229 
(2022).
	 6.	 Fujita, Y. & Hamamoto, Y. A robust automatic crack detection method from noisy concrete surfaces. Mach. Vis. Appl. 22(2), 245–254 
(2010).
	 7.	 Mustafa, R. & Mohamed, E. A. Concrete crack detection based multi-block CLBP features and SVM classifier. J. Theor. Appl. Inf. 
Technol. 81(1), 151–160 (2015).
	 8.	 Chen, J.-H., Su, M.-C., Cao, R., Hsu, S.-C. & Lu, J.-C. A self organizing map optimization based image recognition and processing 
model for bridge crack inspection. Autom. Constr. 73, 58–66 (2017).
	 9.	 Li, R. et al. Automatic bridge crack detection using Unmanned aerial vehicle and Faster R-CNN. Construct. Build. Mater. 362, 112 
(2023).
	10.	 Melchiorre, J., D’Amato, L., Agostini, F. & Rizzo, A. M. Acoustic emission onset time detection for structural monitoring with 
U-Net neural network architecture. Dev. Built Environ. 18, 100449 (2024).
	11.	 Rosso, M. M., Aloisio, A., Melchiorre, J., Huo, F. & Marano, G. C. "Noise effects analysis on subspace-based damage detection with 
neural networks. Structures 54, 23–37 (2023).
	12.	 Thiyagarajan, K., Kodagoda, S., Ranasinghe, R., Vitanage, D. & Iori, G. Robust sensor suite combined with predictive analytics 
enabled anomaly detection model for smart monitoring of concrete sewer pipe surface moisture conditions. IEEE Sens. J. 20(15), 
8232–8243 (2020).
	13.	 Wahab, A. et al. Review on microwave nondestructive testing techniques and its applications in concrete technology. Construct. 
Build. Mater. 209, 135–146 (2019).
	14.	 Ai, D., Jiang, G., Lam, S.-K., He, P. & Li, C. Computer vision framework for crack detection of civil infrastructure—A review. Eng. 
Appl. Artif. Intell. 117, 105478 (2023).
	15.	 Lindley, C. A. et al. A probabilistic approach for acoustic emission based monitoring techniques: With application to structural 
health monitoring. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 208, 110958 (2024).
	16.	 Shrifan, N. H. M. M., Akbar, M. F. & Isa, N. A. M. Prospect of using artificial intelligence for microwave nondestructive testing 
technique: A review. IEEE Access 7, 110628–110650 (2019).
	17.	 Deng, J., Singh, A., Zhou, Y., Lu, Y. & Lee, V.C.-S. Review on computer vision-based crack detection and quantification 
methodologies for civil structures. Construct. Build. Mater. 356, 129238 (2022).
	18.	 Ayele, Y. Z., Aliyari, M., Griffiths, D. & Droguett, E. L. Automatic crack segmentation for UAV-assisted bridge inspection. Energies 
13, 23 (2020).
	19.	 Dan, D. & Dan, Q. Automatic recognition of surface cracks in bridges based on 2D-APES and mobile machine vision. Measurement 
168, 34 (2021).
	20.	 Li, D. et al. Automatic defect detection of metro tunnel surfaces using a vision-based inspection system. Adv. Eng. Inform. 47, 32 
(2021).
	21.	 Wang, P., Wang, S., Jierula, A. & Wen, Z. Automatic identification and location of tunnel lining cracks. Adv. Civ. Eng. 2021, 1–9 
(2021).
	22.	 Liao, J. et al. Automatic tunnel crack inspection using an efficient mobile imaging module and a lightweight CNN. IEEE Trans. 
Intell. Transp. Syst. 23(9), 15190–15203 (2022).
	23.	 Kheradmandi, N. & Mehranfar, V. A critical review and comparative study on image segmentation-based techniques for pavement 
crack detection. Construct. Build. Mater. 321, 11 (2022).
	24.	 Tajeripour, F. & Ershad, S. F. Porosity detection by using improved local binary patterns. In International Conference on Wseas 
International Conference on Electronics, Hardware, Wireless & Optical Communications, & Wseas International Conference on Signal 
Processing, Robotics & Automation. 116–121 (2012).
	25.	 Fekri-Ershad, S. & Tajeripour, F. Multi-resolution and noise-resistant surface defect detection approach using new version of local 
binary patterns. Appl. Artif. Intell. 31(5–6), 395–410 (2017).
	26.	 Kaddah, W. et al. Optimized minimal path selection (OMPS) method for automatic and unsupervised crack segmentation within 
two-dimensional pavement images. Vis. Comput. 35(9), 1293–1309 (2018).
	27.	 Chun, P. J., Izumi, S. & Yamane, T. Automatic detection method of cracks from concrete surface imagery using two-step light 
gradient boosting machine. Comput. -Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 36(1), 61–72 (2020).
	28.	 Fujita, Y., Mitani, Y. & Hamamoto, Y. A method for crack detection on a concrete structure. In The 18th International Conference 
on Pattern Recognition (ICPR’06) (2006).
	29.	 Yu, S.-N., Jang, J.-H. & Han, C.-S. Auto inspection system using a mobile robot for detecting concrete cracks in a tunnel. Autom. 
Constr. 16(3), 255–261 (2007).
	30.	 Lee, J. H., Lee, J. M., Kim, H. J. & Moon, Y. S. Machine vision system for automatic inspection of bridges. In Congress on Image 
and Signal Processing. 363–366 (2008).
	31.	 Oh, J.-K. et al. Bridge inspection robot system with machine vision. Autom. Constr. 18(7), 929–941 (2009).
	32.	 Yamaguchi, T., Nakamura, S. & Hashimoto, S. An efficient crack detection method using percolation-based image processing. 
IEEE 4, 1875–1880 (2008).
	33.	 Halfawy, M. R. & Hengmeechai, J. Integrated vision-based system for automated defect detection in sewer closed circuit television 
inspection videos. J. Comput. Civ. Eng. 29, 1 (2015).
	34.	 Hao, M., Lu, C., Wang, G. & Wang, W. An improved neuron segmentation model for crack detection—Image segmentation model. 
Cybern. Inf. Technol. 17(2), 119–133 (2017).
	35.	 Ting, G., Wei, L., Yang, Y. & Weixing, W. Pavement crack image segmentation method based on multiple scale and differential box 
dimension. Int. J. Signal Process. Image Process. Pattern Recognit. 10(2), 91–100 (2017).


12
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:20057  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-71075-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	36.	 Huang, Y., Zhang, H., Li, H. & Wu, S. Recovering compressed images for automatic crack segmentation using generative models. 
Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 146, 113 (2021).
	37.	 Kang, D. H. & Cha, Y. J. “Efficient attention-based deep encoder and decoder for automatic crack segmentation. SAGE 1(5), 1–16 
(2021).
	38.	 Li, L., Sun, L., Ning, G. & Tan, S. Automatic pavement crack recognition based on BP neural network. Neural Netw. 26(1), 11–22 
(2014).
	39.	 Armi, L. & Fekri-Ershad, S. Texture image analysis and texture classification methods—A review. Int. Online J. Image Process. 
Pattern Recognit. 2(1), 1–29 (2019).
	40.	 Wang, M., Wan, Y., Ye, Z. & Lai, X. Remote sensing image classification based on the optimal support vector machine and modified 
binary coded ant colony optimization algorithm. Inf. Sci. 402, 50–68 (2017).
	41.	 Hadjidemetriou, G. M., Vela, P. A. & Christodoulou, S. E. Automated pavement patch detection and quantification using support 
vector machines. J. Comput. Civ. Eng. 32, 1 (2018).
	42.	 Pham, B. T., Jaafari, A., Prakash, I. & Bui, D. T. A novel hybrid intelligent model of support vector machines and the MultiBoost 
ensemble for landslide susceptibility modeling. Bull. Eng. Geol. Env. 78(4), 2865–2886 (2018).
	43.	 Shin, H. & Paek, J. Automatic task classification via support vector machine and crowdsourcing. Mob. Inf. Syst. 2018, 1–9 (2018).
	44.	 Cha, Y. J., You, K. & Choi, W. Vision-based detection of loosened bolts using the Hough transform and support vector machines. 
Autom. Construct. 71, 181–188 (2016).
	45.	 Bettahar, S., Stambouli, A. B., Lambert, P. & Benoit, A. PDE-based enhancement of color images in RGB space. IEEE Trans. Image 
Process 21(5), 2500–2512 (2012).
	46.	 Hwang, H. & Haddad, R. A. Adaptive median filters: New algorithms and results. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 5, 499–502 (1995).
	47.	 Jahanshahi, M. R. & Masri, S. F. Adaptive vision-based crack detection using 3D scene reconstruction for condition assessment 
of structures. Autom. Construct. 22, 567–576 (2012).
	48.	 Hu, Y., Zhao, C.-X. & Wang, H.-N. Automatic pavement crack detection using texture and shape descriptors. IETE Tech. Rev. 27(5), 
398–405 (2010).
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support provided by the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province 
of China (No. 24NSFSC5134), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52308391) and Sichuan 
Normal University Experimental Equipment Research Project (No. ZZYQ2021003).
Author contributions
R.W. and R.C. wrote the main manuscript text. X.G. provided the idea of the article.  J.L. and H.Y.  prepared 
Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 and Tables 1, 2 and 3. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Funding
This research was funded by the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province of China (No. 24NSFSC5134), 
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52308391) and Sichuan Normal University Experimental 
Equipment Research Project (No. ZZYQ2021003).
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to X.-X.G.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide 
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have 
permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and 
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain 
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​
licen​ses/​by-​nc-​nd/4.​0/.
© The Author(s) 2024


