# 5. 연구논문_A three‑step SEM‑Bayesian network approach for predicting the determinants of CloudIoT‑based healthcare adoption

---
**Source:** [[5. 연구논문_A three‑step SEM‑Bayesian network approach for predicting the determinants of CloudIoT‑based healthcare adoption.pdf]]
**Category:** #mba #ai
**Imported:** 2026-03-05

Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Int. j. inf. tecnol. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41870-024-01743-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A three‑step SEM‑Bayesian network approach for predicting 
the determinants of CloudIoT‑based healthcare adoption
Iyad Altawaiha1 · Rodziah Atan1 · Razali Bin Yaakob2 · 
Rusli Bin Hj Abdullah1 
Received: 15 June 2023 / Accepted: 7 January 2024 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Bharati Vidyapeeth’s Institute of Computer Applications and Management 2024
Abstract  Adopting the CloudIoT-based healthcare para-
digm provides various prospects for medical IT and con-
siderably enhances healthcare services. However, compared 
to the advanced development of CloudIoT-based healthcare 
systems, their usage is relatively low among healthcare 
professionals in hospitals. Thus, a study on the healthcare 
professionals acceptance and adoption of CloudIoT-based 
healthcare is critical. This study explores factors influenc-
ing healthcare professionals adoption of CloudIoT-based 
healthcare solutions by extending the Unified Theory of 
Acceptance and Use of Technology 2 model. Data was col-
lected from 300 healthcare professionals in Jordan through 
an online questionnaire developed using the ­Google® form 
application. The Bayesian Network and Structural Equation 
Modeling techniques were used to analyze and validate the 
proposed model. The results revealed that the healthcare 
professional’s behavioral intention is directly affected by 
seven factors: performance expectancy, effort expectancy, 
facilitating conditions, habit, trust, privacy, and security. 
The results also indicate that trust mediates the influence of 
privacy, facilitating conditions, and performance expectancy 
on behavioral intention. The research results will aid Clou-
dIoT service providers, healthcare organizations, designers, 
and developers by offering comprehensive knowledge of the 
significant factors of CloudIoT-based healthcare adoption. A 
better understanding of these factors will help these stake-
holder groups enhance their services and speed up the adop-
tion of CloudIoT in the healthcare area.
Keywords  CloudIoT · Healthcare professionals · 
Structural equation modeling · Bayesian network · 
Adoption · UTAUT2
1  Introduction
Improving the quality of healthcare services is a top pri-
ority for governments and health organizations worldwide. 
Conventional healthcare systems face various challenges, 
including a rise in chronic diseases, an aging population, 
a shortage of medical professionals, and higher healthcare 
costs [1, 2]. As a result, innovative approaches to health-
care delivery are necessary, such as promoting preventative 
behavior and leveraging technology-based healthcare [1].
Generally, using information technology in healthcare is 
termed ‘e-health’ [3]; e-health has many benefits, including 
improved information interchange and healthcare quality [4]. 
However, current e-health systems have several challenges, 
including heterogeneous devices, a lack of processing capac-
ity, and a large volume of data that requires ample storage 
space [5]. This provides fertile ground for using cutting-edge 
technologies to develop new e-health systems, like the adop-
tion of CloudIoT technology.
CloudIoT-based healthcare (CIoTHC) is an innova-
tive system that combines connectivity technologies, 
apps, objects, the cloud, and people to monitor and track 
patients and preserve their data for ongoing treatment and 
analysis [6]. This approach enables real-time monitoring of 
patient’s vital signs, potentially saving lives. Additionally, 
monitoring individuals’ vital signs can help identify and 
 *	 Iyad Altawaiha 
	
Iyad.twh@yahoo.com
1	
Department of Software Engineering and Information 
Systems, Faculty of Computer Science and Information 
Technology, Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), 
43400 Serdang, Malaysia
2	
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Computer 
Science and Information Technology, Universiti Putra 
Malaysia (UPM), 43400 Serdang, Malaysia


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
predict abnormal conditions early on. Moreover, reviewing 
a patient’s medical data can aid in detecting diseases before 
they spread [7]. CIoTHC offers high-quality, low-cost, and 
ubiquitous healthcare services. It facilitates medical diagno-
sis, provides real-time patient health data, monitors patient 
compliance with prescriptions, and generates alerts when a 
patient’s condition is abnormal [5].
Several CIoTHC systems have been introduced due to the 
potential of CloudIoT to enhance healthcare services. How-
ever, CloudIoT is still in its early stages of adoption in the 
healthcare industry, and the factors influencing its adoption 
have not been thoroughly investigated.
Therefore, this research aims to identify the key factors 
influencing the adoption of CloudIoT-based technology by 
healthcare professionals (HCPs) using a novel methodology. 
The proposed adoption model extends the Unified Theory 
of Acceptance and Use of Technology 2 (UTAUT2) with 
additional factors from the literature. The model is tested 
using Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) and Bayesian 
Network (BN) approaches in three steps.
First, SEM is utilized to conduct the path analysis and 
test hypotheses. Second, significant factors SEM identifies 
are entered as inputs into the BN to predict their relation-
ships. Third, SEM analyzes the modified model resulting 
from the first two steps. The research activities are illustrated 
in Fig. 1.
This research aims to design and develop a theoretical 
research model and examines the main factors impacting 
HCP’s adoption of CIoTHC. The following are the questions 
that have been posed for this research:
1.	 What factors affect HCP’s adoption of CIoTHC?
2.	 How do we identify the causal relationships among these 
factors?
3.	 How do these factors influence HCP’s adoption intention 
of CIoTHC?
The following are the research significances compared to 
previous research studies:
1.	 According to the literature, developing countries adopt 
new technology more slowly than developed countries 
[8]. To our knowledge, there have been few research 
studies on CloudIoT technology adoption in develop-
ing nations like Jordan. Thus, this research is the first 
effort to offer beneficial insights into adopting CIoTHC 
in Jordan, a developing country.
2.	 Although CloudIoT technology is important, little 
evidence in the literature gives insights into CIoTHC 
adoption via developing a theoretical model focusing on 
user’s intentions [6]. Indeed, the application of technol-
ogy adoption theories is less explored in the CloudIoT 
context. Meanwhile, previous studies have focused on 
the systems architectures and the different features of 
CloudIoT services. Nevertheless, end-users adoption of 
this technology has significantly been overlooked in pre-
vious research studies. As a result, developing a theoreti-
cal adoption model, which is the primary contribution 
of this research, is deemed a beneficial tool.
3.	 Previous research studies have used SEM to analyze 
and validate the adoption models. However, no research 
studies have used BN with SEM to analyze and validate 
models in the CloudIoT context. Therefore, another con-
tribution of this research in the IS adoption literature 
is introducing a new three-step strategy for predicting 
HCP’s adoption of CIoTHC, which combines the ben-
efits of BN and SEM approaches.
The anticipated research results will aid CloudIoT service 
providers, healthcare organizations, designers, and develop-
ers by offering comprehensive knowledge since the findings 
are predicted to list the significant factors of CIoTHC adop-
tion. A better understanding of these factors will help these 
Fig. 1   Research activities


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
stakeholder groups enhance their services and speed up the 
adoption of CloudIoT in the healthcare area.
2  Literature review
This section introduces the CIoTHC paradigm, reviews 
eHealth adoption studies, and summarizes relevant theo-
retical models from existing technology adoption studies 
in various healthcare settings. This robust foundation will 
support our research on health professional’s acceptance of 
the CIoTHC model.
2.1  CloudIoT‑based healthcare
New technologies like Cloud Computing (CC) and the 
Internet of Things (IoT) have emerged throughout the ICT 
revolution of the twenty-first century. It’s important to note 
that these two technologies vary significantly, yet it’s also 
true that they complement one another [7]. CloudIoT inte-
grates these two technologies, improving their capabilities 
by addressing IoT-related issues such as data access, data 
analysis, security, privacy, and computing process [9].
Experts believe that adopting CIoTHC technology pro-
vides various prospects for medical IT and considerably 
enhances healthcare services [10]. A significant aspect of 
CIoTHC is its ubiquitous, high-quality, and low-cost medi-
cal services. CloudIoT streamlines healthcare operations and 
improves medical service quality by allowing collaboration 
among parties. IoT Sensors create massive amounts of data 
that must be subsequently processed in healthcare systems 
[11]. Meanwhile, CC provides a successful way to manage 
and process sensor-collected data. In addition, CC offers 
flexible storage and processing infrastructure and boosts 
medical data security, privacy, and service availability, 
which are the common issues of IoT [12]. Consequently, 
driven by the effect of CloudIoT in improving healthcare 
services, many CIoTHC systems have been developed and 
presented.
However, little evidence in the literature gives insights 
into CIoTHC adoption via developing a theoretical model 
focusing on user’s intentions. Indeed, the application of 
technology adoption theories has been explored less in the 
CIoTHC context. The previous studies have focused on the 
systems architectures and the different features of CIoTHC 
services. Nevertheless, end-user’s adoption of this technol-
ogy has significantly been overlooked in previous research 
studies.
2.2  Introducing new technology into healthcare
Introducing new technologies in healthcare is a two-
way process where technology influences the healthcare 
organization’s operations while end-users impact techno-
logical advancements. This makes end-user engagement 
and support vital for successful outcomes [13]. Studies 
have revealed that accepting novel technologies by HCPs 
is crucial for effective implementation. Conversely, if these 
professionals reject new technology, it can lead to project 
failures [14, 15]. For instance, a telemedicine initiative in 
Germany faced a five-year delay due to physicians’ reluc-
tance to embrace the technology despite acknowledging 
its benefits [16]. Similarly, in Seoul, the slow uptake of a 
telemedicine system initiated in 1988 was primarily attrib-
uted to HCP’s hesitance towards a new eHealth system [17]. 
HCPs often hesitate to adopt new eHealth systems, fearing 
a compromise in healthcare quality.
The successful implementation of new technology in 
healthcare largely depends on HCPs’ acceptance, as shown 
in the cases above. Several studies confirm this finding by 
highlighting the challenges of introducing new technology 
in healthcare settings [18–21]. Therefore, to implement new 
healthcare technologies effectively, organizations should 
focus not only on technical aspects but also on understanding 
and meeting the needs of HCPs. This approach will ensure 
successful implementation and avoid unnecessary expenses.
2.3  Review of ehealth adoption studies
The existing research investigates eHealth adoption through 
two primary perspectives: subjects and objects. The sub-
jects of adoption are the individuals or entities considering 
adopting new healthcare services. They can be categorized 
into three groups: healthcare organizations, profession-
als, and recipients. The motivation for adoption may dif-
fer based on the subject. For example, healthcare recipients 
(HCRs) prioritize how the service can positively impact 
their health, while HCPs focus on improving job efficiency 
and performance.
Martins et  al. [22] found that patients adoption of 
mHealth is heavily influenced by health concerns and exist-
ing healthcare inefficiencies. On the other hand, Fan et al. 
[21] showed that HCP’s adoption of AI-based medical diag-
nosis support systems (AIMDSS) is mainly driven by their 
work environment and the technology’s perceived benefits. 
As for healthcare organizations, they tend to focus on factors 
such as hospital characteristics, government regulations, and 
support programs.
Furthermore, many studies group respondents based on 
specific attributes to gain a better understanding of adoption 
behavior. Gender is commonly used as a moderating vari-
able to investigate gender disparities among HCPs in vari-
ous eHealth technology adoption studies, including those on 
IoT-based healthcare [23], electronic health records (EHRs) 
[24], and mHealth [25].


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
Adoption objects refer to innovative healthcare technolo-
gies designed explicitly for adoption subjects. These objects 
can be categorized into groups based on their specific ben-
efits to different adoption subjects. In the context of HCRs, 
adoption objects can be divided into three main categories: 
remote consulting systems, remote monitoring systems, and 
disease management systems. For HCPs, adoption objects 
may include a broader range of options, such as medical 
assistance systems, remote monitoring systems, and medi-
cal data management systems. Lastly, adoption objects for 
healthcare organizations align with those designed for HCPs. 
The classification of these adoption objects, according to 
their corresponding adoption subjects, is detailed in Table 1.
2.4  Technology adoption theories
Adapting and integrating theories of technology adoption 
in many sectors assists us in developing a more precise 
understanding of user adoption behavior and the associated 
processes. Many technology adoption theories have been 
frequently applied in healthcare adoption domains, includ-
ing the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB), Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM), theory of Diffusion of Innova-
tion (DOI), Technology Organization Environment (TOE), 
Task Technology Fit (TTF), Unified Theory of Acceptance 
and Use of Technology (UTAUT), and UTAUT2. TAM is 
usually utilized to study people’s behavior toward adopting 
healthcare services. Perceived usefulness and ease of use 
are two key factors in TAM that impact the behavioral inten-
tion that, in turn, affects actual user behavior. The previous 
research studies that used TAM all supposed these relations. 
Papa et al. [29] extended the original TAM with two exter-
nal variables to investigate factors affecting users’ adoption 
of wearable health devices. The findings showed that all 
variables were significant. Another instance was offered by 
Kamal et al. [30], who extended TAM with seven external 
variables (Privacy, Trust, Perceived risk, User resistance, 
Technology anxiety, Facilitating conditions, and Social 
influence) to explore the determinants affecting telemedi-
cine adoption by patients. According to the findings, both 
the original TAM variables and the seven external variables 
significantly impacted the adoption of telemedicine.
TPB postulates that behavioral intention is influenced by 
attitude, subjective norms, and behavioral control. TPB has 
rarely been used alone in healthcare adoption studies; it’s 
often combined with other theories. For instance, Wu et al. 
[31] integrated TPB with TAM to investigate factors influ-
encing mHealth service adoption by HCPs.
TOE is a well-known theory for analyzing organizations’ 
behavior when deciding whether to accept new services. The 
TOE focuses on three dimensions: technical, organizational, 
and environmental, to investigate the organization’s adoption 
of new technologies. For example, Yang et al. [32] applied 
TOE to investigate hospitals’ decisions to adopt health infor-
mation systems.
Innovation adoption may be explained by DOI theory 
as a process in which a novel thing is progressively under-
stood and accepted by a particular group over time via a 
specific set of channels. In contrast to other theories, the 
DOI emphasizes the importance of information at every step 
of the adoption process [33]. DOI has been used in health-
care technology adoption studies to investigate individual’s 
and organization’s adoption decisions. Yet, it has been uti-
lized more greatly with individuals’ adoption decisions than 
organizations. For instance, DOI was used by Chew et al. 
[34] to explore how to increase Internet use by family doc-
tors. In this study using DOI, the researchers revealed pivotal 
information encouraging doctors to begin and continue using 
the Internet.
According to TTF theory, user adoption behavior can be 
explained by the degree of compatibility between technol-
ogy and the tasks it supports [35]. TPB has not been used 
alone in healthcare adoption studies and is usually combined 
with other theories. For example, Wang et al. [36] combined 
TTF with UTAUT to investigate the adoption of wearable 
health devices. Their findings demonstrated that the interac-
tion between tasks and technology significantly influenced 
consumers’ adoption intentions.
As a unified theory that integrates eight outstanding 
theories of technology adoption, UTAUT has recently 
been popular in the literature on healthcare service adop-
tion. UTAUT was first suggested in 2003 by Venkatesh 
et al. [37]. Even though it came out later than other theo-
ries, it has a higher support level than others. An instance 
Table 1   Classification of 
adoption objects according to 
their adoption subjects
Adoption
Example
Subjects
Objects
HCRs
Remote consulting systems
Digital healthcare platforms [26]
Remote monitoring systems
IoT-based healthcare [27]
Disease management systems
Diabetes self-management [28]
HCPs
Remote monitoring systems
IoT-based healthcare [19]
Medical data management systems
EHRs [24]
Medical assistance systems
AIMDSS [21]


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
of the UTAUT application in the healthcare domain was 
presented by Fan et al. [21], who extended the model 
with other suitable factors from the literature to inves-
tigate factors impacting HCP’s adoption of AIMDSS in 
China. Their empirical results revealed the importance 
of the original UTAUT constructs and the external vari-
able (trust) as a mediator variable in adopting AIMDSS. 
Another instance was provided by Ben Arfi et al. [27], 
who studied the factors influencing the consumer’s adop-
tion of IoT-based healthcare devices. The study extended 
the UTAUT with two external variables (Perceived Risk 
and Financial Cost). The findings showed the significant 
impact of the proposed model’s factors on the consumer’s 
intention, except for perceived risk and social influence.
UTAUT model was updated to UTAUT2 by includ-
ing three new constructs (hedonic motivation, price-
value, and habit) [38]. Recently, UTAUT2 has become 
prominent in healthcare adoption studies. However, many 
researchers suggested modifying UTAUT2 when applied 
in healthcare [38, 39]. For example, Alam et al. [39] 
modified the UTAUT2 by adding four external variables 
( Privacy, Lifestyle, Self-efficacy, and Trust) to deter-
mine factors influencing mHealth adoption among Bang-
ladesh youth. The findings showed the significant effects 
of social influence, privacy, performance expectancy, 
trust, hedonic motivation, and facilitating conditions 
on the youth’s behavioral intention to adopt mHealth. 
Another example was provided by Semiz and Semiz [40], 
who extended UTAUT2 with trust factor to study fac-
tors impacting consumer’s adoption of mHealth in Tur-
key. Their findings showed that all original constructs 
of UTAUT2 and the trust factor significantly moved the 
consumer’s adoption intention.
3  Theoretical model and hypotheses
In recent decades, many models have been developed to 
study information systems’ acceptance and use intention. 
Studies on these models found that the best theoretical basis 
for the customer’s perspective should be considered [41]. 
Therefore, the UTAUT2 model was selected as a theoreti-
cal foundation for its higher predictive potential, especially 
relevant in the user’s context, to find an appropriate theory 
encompassing practically all factors impacting the adoption 
intention of CIoTHC. However, UTAUT2 constructs are 
insufficient, and the model should be modified or extended 
when applied in the healthcare domain, as suggested by 
many researchers [38, 39]. Therefore, the UTAUT2 model is 
modified in this study by including new factors and exclud-
ing others, as shown in Fig. 2. To this end, the hypotheses 
below are formulated and discussed.
3.1  Behavioral intention
“Behavioral intention (BI) is defined as the extent whereby a 
person intends to conduct a certain behavior” [37]. Research 
indicated that behavioral intention might be used as the base 
to develop a behavioral research model for studying the 
adoption of new technology [42]. Practically, the CIoTHC 
paradigm is a new technology; therefore, the behavioral 
intention is used in this study rather than the actual use.
3.2  Performance expectancy
“Performance expectancy (PE) is the extent to which an 
individual perceives using a new system or technology will 
aid him to accomplish job performance” [37]. Generally, 
people are more likely to adopt and utilize technology if they 
believe it can improve their everyday lives. In the healthcare 
Fig. 2   The proposed model 
for cloudIoT-based helthcare 
adoption


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
domain, many empirical results proved the significant influ-
ence of PE on the user’s behavioral intention [43–46]. PE 
represents user expectations associated with adopting Clou-
dIoT to improve conventional healthcare systems. In light of 
CloudIoT’s significant contribution to improving healthcare 
services, it is logical to assert that HCPs would perceive 
CloudIoT as a beneficial technology for increasing the qual-
ity of healthcare services. Considering the above, the follow-
ing hypothesis is formulated:
H1: PE significantly influences HCP’s behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
3.3  Effort expectancy
“Effort expectancy (EE) is the extent to which people per-
ceive the use of the new system or technology as effortless” 
[37]. Usually, people are concerned about the time and effort 
needed to utilize a new system. Previous studies identified 
EE as a vital factor in the healthcare technology adoption 
domain, where the extent of ease linked with the new system 
or technology had a favorable impact on behavioral intention 
[44–47]. In this study context, EE represents HCP’s percep-
tions of how easy CloudIoT solutions are to use. Based on 
the above, the following hypothesis is formulated:
H2: EE significantly influences HCP’s behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
3.4  Social influence
“Social influence (SI) refers to the degree to which an indi-
vidual perceives that significant others believe he/she should 
use a new technology or system” [37]. Previous studies iden-
tified SI as a vital factor in healthcare technology adoption. 
For example, Alam et al. [39] investigated factors influenc-
ing the adoption of mHealth among Bangladesh youth. The 
findings showed the significant effects of social influence on 
the youth’s behavioral intention to adopt mHealth. Another 
example, Solangi et al. [19], showed that HCP’s adoption 
intention of IoT-based healthcare is greatly influenced by 
their colleagues’ and relative’s opinions. In this research, we 
postulate that HCPs link with individuals in their immediate 
environment who think their opinions are essential, increas-
ing their social impact in the CIoTHC domain. Thus, the 
following hypothesis is formulated:
H3: EE significantly influences HCP’s behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
3.5  Facilitating conditions
“Facilitating conditions (FCs) refers to the degree to which 
an individual perceives the existence of organizational 
and technical infrastructural that facilitate the usage of the 
new technology or system” [37]. Previous research studies 
evaluating the influence of FCs in the adoption of different 
technology-based healthcare services found that FCs had 
a positive impact on adoption intention [39, 48, 49]. Like-
wise, HCPs are more likely to embrace CIoTHC if they have 
enough organizational and technical infrastructure. Based on 
the above, the following hypothesis is formulated:
H4: FCs significantly influence HCPs’ behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
3.6  Habit
“Habit (HB) is an outcome of experience using and practic-
ing the innovative technology over time” [38]. Consumer’s 
habits are shifting due to the introduction of cutting-edge 
technology [50]. According to previous research on tech-
nology adoption, habitual use helps people get more famil-
iar with a product by dispelling common misunderstand-
ings [51]. Many research studies have determined habit as 
a significant factor in healthcare technology adoption. For 
example, Kwateng et al. [45] investigated factors influenc-
ing health information systems adoption among HCPs in 
Ghana. The findings showed the significant effects of habit 
on HCP’s behavioral intention. Based on the above, the fol-
lowing hypothesis is formulated:
H5: HB significantly influences HCP’s behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
3.7  Trust
“Trust (TR) refers to the willingness of an individual to 
depend on a partner to whom he has confidence” [52]. TR 
is a critical factor in the healthcare sector, and academics, 
practitioners, and scholars have all agreed that trust in the 
digital era is beneficial [52]. E-Health’s acceptability relies 
heavily on user trust, which is highlighted as the essential 
factor in healthcare technology adoption literature [31]. For 
example, Fan et al. [21] investigated factors influencing the 
adoption of AIMDSS among HCPs in China. The findings 
showed the significant effects of trust on the HCP’s behavio-
ral intention. For CIoTHC services, trust in data analysis and 
monitoring would significantly impact adoption. Therefore, 
the following hypothesis is formulated:
H6: TR significantly influences HCP’s behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
3.8  Privacy
Privacy (PR) refers to the extent to which a patient’s or a 
healthcare professional’s personal information is protected 
from disclosure to a third party. Many researchers have noted 
that PR is a significant factor in successfully implement-
ing technology-based healthcare [39, 53, 54]. According 
to Soceanu et al. [55], medical professional’s perceptions 


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
of the system’s suitability and healthcare applicability may 
improve if medical data privacy is protected. For CIoTHC 
services, privacy would significantly impact the adoption 
intention. Thus, it is hypothesized as follows:
H7: PR significantly influences HCP’s behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
3.9  Security
Many security risks have arisen in technology-based health-
care, such as infiltration, misuse, or failure [56]. In the 
CloudIoT context, however, an increasing number of the 
presented systems concentrated on the possible solutions 
to these constraints, driven by the prospective effect that 
CloudIoT has in improving healthcare services. Previous 
research studies proved the positive effect of security (SE) 
on user behavioral intention. For example, Hartono et al. 
[57] revealed the impact of security on user intention toward 
using mHealth services. Likewise, the following hypothesis 
is formulated:
H8: SE significantly influences HCPs’ behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
3.10  User innovativeness
“User Innovativeness (UI) is defined as an individual’s 
inclination to be a technology leader” [58], indicating that 
individuals with a high degree of technology innovativeness 
are more likely to accept and try new technologies [59]. 
Previous research has identified five categories of adopters, 
including innovators, early adopters, early majority, late 
majority, and laggards, which may respond differently to 
new technologies based on inherent propensity [33]. User 
innovativeness is a significant factor in technology-based 
healthcare adoption studies and other fields. Individuals with 
high technology innovativeness tend to have a positive per-
ception of the utility of new technology [60]. Therefore, the 
following hypothesis is proposed:
H9: UI significantly influences HCPs’ behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
3.11  Task complexity
“Task complexity (TC) is the degree of perceived difficulty 
and required load to complete a specific task” [61]. It may 
have resulted from a lack of comprehension or relevant 
information. Thus, the new system or technology must fill 
the gap and offer the required information. TC has emerged 
as an essential factor in studying people’s technology adop-
tion [21]. However, the usefulness of task-support technol-
ogy differs as the roles played by technology vary for tasks 
with varying complexity levels. HCPs may perceive the 
more significant benefit of CloudIoT for more sophisticated 
tasks (ongoing monitoring and analysis of patient data) than 
more straightforward tasks. Thus, we argue that TC is asso-
ciated with adoption intention in the context of CIoTHC, and 
we propose the following hypothesis:
H10: TC significantly influences HCP’s behavioral inten-
tion to adopt CIoTHC.
4  Research design and methods
Our methodology follows a structured multi-phase approach 
that outlines the sequential steps taken during the study. 
The approach starts with an initial review of the literature 
on the CloudIoT paradigm, theories, models, and eHealth 
adoption studies. This is followed by model development, 
which includes hypothesis formulation, model construction, 
and a pilot study for preliminary validation. The next phase 
involves data collection and model validation, where we use 
a three-step SEM and BN approach to examine the gathered 
data. Finally, the results and discussion phase interprets find-
ings, highlights contributions to the field, and draws conclu-
sions. Figure 3 shows the structured multi-phase approach 
for our methodology.
4.1  Questionnaire design
There are many methods to collect data, but one of the most 
effective is a structured questionnaire. Therefore, a question-
naire has been developed to validate the CIoTHC adoption 
model for HCPs. A pilot study was conducted first, and the 
questionnaire was modified based on its result. The ques-
tionnaire contains two parts of questions: demographic 
information questions and item questions to measure eleven 
latent variables on 5 points Likert scale. All the items are 
adapted from prior research studies that were reliable and 
valid. Also, a detailed explanation of CIoTHC and the partic-
ipants’ rights were provided in the questionnaire. Appendix 
A shows the factors, measurement items, and sourses that 
the items adapted from.
4.2  Data collection and sample characteristics
An online survey was used to gather data from the HCPs in 
Jordan, and the questionnaire was developed using ­Google® 
Forms. Non-probability sampling was used in this research 
study, particularly a combination of snowball and self-selec-
tion sampling. It is possible to target the research population 
more precisely using this integration and attract participants 
who are notoriously difficult to reach [62].
The HCPs in Jordan are the target population. Three hun-
dred responded to the questionnaire, including 198 males 
and 102 females. Respondents between 30 and 45 account 
for more than 50% of the sample, while those beyond 45 


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
accounts for 23%. In terms of profession, doctors account 
for more than 70% of the sample, while nurses account for 
around 30%. The sample’s demographic characteristics are 
shown in Table 2.
5  Data analysis
The data analysis is performed using SEM and BN 
approaches in three steps. First, SEM is used to conduct the 
path analysis and test hypotheses. Second, significant factors 
identified by SEM are inputted into the BN to predict rela-
tionships among them. Third, the modified model resulting 
from the first two steps is analyzed by SEM.
5.1  First step: structural equation modeling
This research employed the SEM technique to evaluate the 
causal relationships between latent constructs in the first 
analysis step. SEM contains two models: the measurement 
model and the structural model.
5.1.1  Measurement model
The first step in the SEM analysis process is the measure-
ment model, which evaluates the validity and reliability of 
each factor and assesses whether the questionnaire items can 
validly measure the factors in the proposed model [63]. This 
study used Cronbach’s Alpha test to ensure questionnaire 
reliability, with values above 0.7 considered reliable. The 
results, shown in Table 3, indicate that Cronbach’s Alpha 
values were higher than 0.7.
Construct validity comprises convergent and discrimi-
nant validity. Three criteria are used to assess a construct’s 
convergent validity [31]: (1) all standardized items should 
have item loadings greater than 0.70, (2) each construct’s 
composite reliability (CR) should be greater than 0.8, and 
(3) each construct should have an average variance extracted 
(AVE) greater than 0.5. In this study, all constructs met these 
criteria, as presented in Table 3.
Discriminant validity was then assessed using the square 
root of AVE, which should be larger for each construct than 
• Review CloudIoT 
Paradigm
• Review Theories and 
Models
• Review eHealth adoption 
Studies
Literature Review
• Hypothese Development
• Model Development
• Questionnaire Design
• Pilot Study
Model Development
• Data Collection
• Data Analysis
• Hypotheses Testing
Data Collection and 
Model Validation
• Discussion of Findings
• Identify Contributions
• Draw Conclusion
Result and Discussion
Fig. 3   The structured multi-phase approach for our methodology
Table 2   Sample’s demographic characteristics
Demographic
Frequency
Percentage
Gender
 Male
198
0.66
 Female
102
0.34
Age
  < 30
75
0.25
 30–45
156
0.52
  > 45
69
0.23
Professional title
 Doctor
212
0.707
 Nurse
88
0.293
Table 3   Reliability and convergent validity
Construct
Cronbach’s alpha
Composite 
reliability
Item loading
AVE
BI
0.772
0.868
0.821–0.846
0.687
EE
0.909
0.936
0.876–0.898
0.785
FCs
0.870
0.911
0.807–0.867
0.720
HB
0.767
0.865
0.789–0.853
0.682
PE
0.870
0.911
0.790–0.874
0.719
PR
0.703
0.834
0.760–0.830
0.627
SE
0.840
0.893
0.786–0.854
0.676
SI
0.716
0.840
0.724–0.840
0.637
TC
0.755
0.859
0.804–0.845
0.671
TR
0.815
0.890
0.854–0.856
0.730
UI
0.783
0.851
0.735–0.817
0.589


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
the correlation with other constructs. Table 4 shows that all 
constructs met the discriminant validity condition.
5.2  Structural model
The structural model was conducted using the SmartPLS 
tool. Ten hypotheses were tested in the proposed model, 
and one dependent variable was confirmed (behavioral 
intention). The results showed that seven hypotheses were 
accepted, while three were rejected. Table 5 shows the 
hypotheses testing results, and Fig. 4 shows the path analy-
sis diagram.
The finding revealed that PE and EE significantly influ-
enced BI (β = 0.206, P < 0.001), (β = 0.106, p < 0.05), 
which supports H1 and H2. The findings also show that SI 
did not influence BI (P > 0.05), rejecting H3. In addition, 
FCs, HB, TR, SE, and PR have been shown to have sig-
nificant influences on BI (β = 0.116, P < 0.05), (β = 0.152, 
P < 0.001), (β = 0.236, P < 0.001), (β = 0.107, P < 0.05), 
(β = 0.146, P < 0.01), supporting H4, H5, H6, H7, and H8. 
Finally, the analysis shows that UI and TC did not influence 
BI (P > 0.05); thus, H9 and H10 were rejected.
5.3  Second step: Bayesian network
BN is a probabilistic graphical model representing causal 
probabilities between variables through a directed acyclic 
graph (DAG) that does not permit loops or self-connection 
[64]. Each node represents a variable, and each directed 
arc represents the conditional relationship, where causal 
probabilities are measured relying on the Bayes theorem:
Figure 5 shows a BN network example.
Our research uses Bayesialab software from Baye-
sia S.A.S [65] to generate the clusters, determine the 
(1)
P(A∕B) = P(B∕A) P(A)
P(B)
Table 4   Correlation analysis 
between constructs
The bold values represent the self-correlations of constructs, indicating their distinctiveness. These values 
should be the highest in their rows, confirming that each construct is more closely related to itself than oth-
ers, ensuring discriminant validity
EE
FCs
HB
PE
PR
SE
SI
TC
TR
UI
EE
0.886
FCs
0.779
0.849
HB
0.661
0.637
0.826
PE
0.810
0.790
0.699
0.848
PR
0.722
0.690
0.676
0.755
0.792
SE
0.772
0.768
0.693
0.816
0.761
0.822
SI
0.748
0.715
0.617
0.756
0.687
0.740
0.798
TC
0.596
0.588
0.617
0.621
0.585
0.635
0.592
0.819
TR
0.802
0.760
0.759
0.842
0.725
0.796
0.737
0.623
0.854
UI
0.302
0.316
0.270
0.293
0.324
0.252
0.235
0.311
0.257
0.768
Table 5   Hypotheses testing 
result
*P-value < 0.05; **P-value < 0.01; ***P-value < 0.001
Hypothesis
Path (β)
Standard 
Deviation 
(STDEV)
T Statistics
|β/STDEF|
P-value
Result
H1 
PE
BI
0.206
0.051
4.053
0.000
Supported ***
H2 
EE
BI
0.106
0.042
2.526
0.012
Supported *
H3 
SI
BI
−0.055
0.033
1.675
0.095
Rejected
H4 
FCs
BI
0.116
0.047
2.472
0.014
Supported *
H5 
HB
BI
0.152
0.035
4.394
0.000
Supported ***
H6 
TR
BI
0.236
0.055
4.326
0.000
Supported ***
H7 
PR
BI
0.146
0.042
3.500
0.001
Supported **
H8 
SE
BI
0.107
0.051
2.105
0.036
Supported *
H9 
UI
BI
−0.033
0.023
1.443
0.150
Rejected
H10 
TC
BI
0.019
0.031
0.633
0.527
Rejected


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
relationships between clusters, and build the BN. Each 
cluster has its class of variables, and a variable clustering 
algorithm was used to create a latent variable for each 
cluster. Latent variables are constructed for each class and 
assigned as the central node to be used in the naïve BN. 
The Expectation–Maximization (EM) algorithm is then 
used to estimate the parameters of these latent variables. 
This analysis method follows the following stages:
First, employing an unsupervised learning algorithm to 
determine the relations among the observed variables and 
create a robust network on which the clustering procedure 
could be performed afterward. The EQ unsupervised algo-
rithm was used in this research to generate the network, 
shown in Fig. 6.
Second, employing the variable clustering algorithm, 
each observed variable is handled as a separate cluster 
at first. Then, the algorithm iteratively merges the clus-
ters closest to each other into a single cluster. However, 
we can modify the observed variables’ membership by 
using our domain knowledge. Accordingly, we changed 
Fig. 4   Path analysis diagram
Fig. 5   BN network example


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
the membership of (PE4 and SE3). Figure 7 shows the 
resulting eight clusters, where each observed variable was 
color-coded based on its cluster membership.
The clustering frequency graph, depicted in Fig. 8, pro-
vides a way to visualize the variable patterns. The thick-
ness of the lines represents the probability of nodes being 
in the same cluster.
Fig. 6   The generated network by EQ
Fig. 7   Variable clustering result
Fig. 8   Clustering frequency graph


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
Third, multiple clustering is applied to create the latent 
variables that serve as the central nodes in the naïve BN. 
Meanwhile, the Expectation–Maximization (EM) algo-
rithm is used to estimate the parameters of these latent 
variables. Figure 9 shows the result of multiple clustering.
Fourth, employing unsupervised learning to discover 
the relations among latent variables. In this stage, we 
defined some conditions for the machine-learning algo-
rithm to prevent illogical causal relations from being dis-
covered in the network before employing the unsupervised 
machine-learning algorithm. We divided variables into 
internal and external groups. The internal group contains 
only the behavioral intention, while the external group 
contains the remaining latent variables. A logical inter-
pretation is that internal variables cannot impact external 
variables. In contrast, external variables can affect internal 
ones. Thus, we can prevent illogical relationships in the 
network by preventing directed edges from the internal 
variable to external variables. Moreover, we prohibited 
any linkages between survey items; thus, the algorithm 
only determines the relationships among latent variables 
expressing clusters.
After applying these constraints, we utilized the unsu-
pervised structural learning algorithm EQ to uncover the 
BN structure. Figure 10 illustrates the resulting network. 
The network structure reveals four new relationships not 
considered in the proposed model, including the influence 
Fig. 9   The result of multiple clustering
Fig. 10   The Bayesian network 
structure


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
of EE on PE and the effects of PR, FCs, and PE on TR. 
These new relationships resulting from this step were 
incorporated into the proposed model, and the hypotheses 
were adjusted, as depicted in Fig. 11.
5.4  Third step: structural equation modeling
Evaluating the collinearity among the variables before test-
ing the structural model is crucial to avoid biasing the path 
analysis findings. In SmartPLS, VIF is utilized to assess 
collinearity. The results indicate that collinearity is not a 
concern in our research since all VIF values are less than 
3.3 [66], as shown in Table 6.
Fig. 11   The modified model
Table 6   Evaluating the 
collinearity
Variables
VIF
BI
TR
PE
EE
1.552
1
FCs
2.525
1.923
HB
2.497
PE
1.778
1.441
PR
2.056
2.107
SE
2.552
TR
2.071
Table 7   Hypotheses testing for 
direct relations
*P-value < 0.05; **P-value < 0.01; ***P-value < 0.001
Direct relations
Path (β)
Standard 
Deviation 
(STDEV)
T Statistics
|β/STDEF|
P-value
Result
H1 
EE
BI
0.092
0.041
2.251
0.025
Supported*
H2 
PE
BI
0.198
0.048
4.103
0.000
Supported***
H3 
EE
PE
0.811
0.021
39.407
0.000
Supported***
H4 
PE
TR
0.553
0.053
10.491
0.000
Supported***
H5 
TR
BI
0.233
0.054
4.337
0.000
Supported***
H6 
PR
TR
0.164
0.048
3.437
0.001
Supported**
H7 
PR
BI
0.134
0.044
3.048
0.002
Supported**
H8 
FCs
TR
0.211
0.053
3.949
0.000
Supported***
H9 
FCs
BI
0.105
0.048
2.200
0.028
Supported*
H10 
SE
BI
0.107
0.052
2.065
0.039
Supported*
H11 
HB
BI
0.154
0.033
4.688
0.000
Supported***


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
5.4.1  Path analysis
In this step, we conducted path analysis and hypotheses 
testing to validate the relations resulting from the first and 
second steps. Eleven hypotheses were tested in the modi-
fied model, and two dependent variables were confirmed 
(trust and behavioral intention). The results showed that all 
hypotheses were accepted. Table 7 shows the hypotheses 
testing for direct relations, Table 8 shows the hypotheses 
testing for indirect relations, and Fig. 12 shows the path 
analysis diagram.
The path analysis results for the direct relations showed 
that BI was significantly influenced by EE (β = 0.092, 
P = 0.025), PE (β = 0.198, P = 0.000), TR (β = 0.233, 
P = 0.000), PR (β = 0.134, P = 0.002), FCs (β = 0.105, 
P = 0.028), SE (β = 0.107, P = 0.039), and HB (β = 0.154, 
P = 0.000), supporting hypotheses H1, H2, H5, H7, H9, 
H10, and H11, respectively. Additionally, the results 
indicated that TR was significantly influenced by PE 
(β = 0.553, P = 0.000), PR (β = 0.164, P = 0.001), and FCs 
(β = 0.211, P = 0.000), supporting hypotheses H4, H6, and 
H8, respectively. Finally, the results indicated that PE was 
significantly influenced by EE (β = 0.811, P = 0.000), sup-
porting hypothesis H3.
Regarding the indirect relations, the path analy-
sis results demonstrated that TR mediated the relation 
between FCs and BI (β = 0.049, P = 0.005), the relation 
between PE and BI (β = 0.129, P = 0.000), and the relation 
Table 8   Hypotheses testing for 
indirect relations
Indirect relations
Path (β)
Standard 
Deviation 
(STDEV)
T Statistics
|β/STDEF|
P-value
Result
FCs
TR
BI
0.049
0.018
2.790
0.005
Supported**
EE
PE
TR
0.448
0.046
9.709
0.000
Supported***
PE
TR
BI
0.129
0.032
4.03
0.000
Supported***
EE
PE
BI
0.160
0.04
4.012
0.000
Supported***
PR
TR
BI
0.038
0.013
2.835
0.005
Supported**
Fig. 12   Path analysis diagram


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
between PR and BI (β = 0.038, P = 0.005). Moreover, the 
results indicated that PE mediated the relation between EE 
and BI (β = 0.160, P = 0.000) and the relation between EE 
and TR (β = 0.448, P = 0.000).
5.4.2  Moderating effect of gender
We used the multi-group analysis method to evaluate the 
effect of the moderating variable (gender). In this method, 
a given path has a moderating impact if the P-value of the 
difference in path coefficient between two groups is less than 
0,05. The result indicated a moderating statistically signifi-
cant effect existed on two paths (FCs—> BI and PR—> BI). 
Table 9 shows the multi-group analysis result.
5.4.3  Evaluation of model fit
The Standardized Root Mean Square (SRMR) is used in 
SmartPLS to evaluate model fit, where the SRMR range of 
0 to 1 is considered acceptable. The SRMR of our theoreti-
cal model is shown in Table 10, where the estimated model 
value was more than 0.05 and less than 0.08, indicating that 
the proposed model is good and fits the data [67].
5.4.4  Evaluation of coefficient of determination
The coefficient of determination (R2) statistic measures 
the amount of variation in an endogenous variable that is 
induced by an exogenous variable [68, 69]. The greater the 
R2 value, which runs from 0 to 1, the better the sample’s 
predictive power. R2 is graded into three categories: 0.75 
(substantial), 0.50 (moderate), and 0.25 (weak), as recom-
mended by Hair et al. [70]. Table 11 shows the R2 of the 
whole model.
5.4.5  Evaluation of effect size
Effect Size (f2) statistic measures an endogenous variable’s 
specific change in R2 induced by an exogenous variable. 
f2 is graded into three categories: 0.35 (strong), 0.15 
(medium), and 0.02 (small), as recommended by Hair et al. 
[65]. Table 12 shows the f2 of all variables.
Table 9   Multi-group analysis result
Hypotheses
Path Coefficients-
diff (Male–Female)
p-Value new 
(Male vs 
Female)
EE
BI
−0.069
0.517
FCs
BI
0.209
0.046
FCs
TR
0.165
0.212
HB
BI
−0.009
0.938
PE
BI
0.12
0.408
EE
PE
0.031
0.478
PE
TR
−0.045
0.733
PR
BI
−0.329
0.000
PR
TR
−0.133
0.211
SC
BI
0.02
0.835
TR
BI
0.062
0.557
Table 10   Evaluation of model fit
SRMR
Saturated model
Estimated model
0.052
0.078
Table 11   Evaluation of R2
Endog-
enous 
variables
R2
Results
PE
0.657
Moderate
TR
0.743
Moderate
BI
0.827
Substantial
Table 12   Evaluation of f2
Exogenous vari-
ables
Endogenous vari-
ables
f2
Results
EE
BI
0.013
Small
PE
BI
0.045
Small
EE
PE
1.918
Strong
PE
TR
0.349
Medium
TR
BI
0.064
Small
PR
TR
0.043
Small
PR
BI
0.036
Small
FCs
TR
0.062
Small
FCs
BI
0.019
Small
SE
BI
0.016
Small
HB
BI
0.053
Small
Table 13   Evaluation of Q2
Endogenous 
variables
SSO
SSE
Q2 = (1-SSE/
SSO)
Results
PE
4548
2427.016
0.466
Medium
TR
3411
1576.477
0.538
Large
BI
3411
1513.473
0.556
Large


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
5.4.6  Evaluation of predictive relevance (Q2)
Using the blindfolding technique, the predictive rele-
vance of the inner model is assessed by calculating the Q2 
value in this step [71]. Q2 is graded into three categories: 
(large > 0.5), (medium > 0.25), and (small > 0), as recom-
mended by Chin [72]. Table 13 shows the Q2 of the endog-
enous variables.
6  Discussion
An empirical study was performed utilizing an extending 
UTAUT2 to understand factors influencing HCP’s behavio-
ral intention to adopt CIoTHC in the Jordanian context. In 
addition to the UTAUT2 model’s factors, five vital factors 
(TR, PR, SC, UI, and TC) were also investigated. A theo-
retical model was proposed and tested in three steps. First, 
SEM was utilized to conduct the path analysis and test the 
postulated hypotheses. Second, the significant factors pro-
duced by SEM were entered into the BN as inputs to predict 
the relations among these factors. Third, the SEM was used 
to analyze the modified model’s causal relations resulting 
from steps 1 and 2.
This research’s findings somewhat align with the existing 
literature on the UTAUT2 application in healthcare. The R2 
for BI was 0.827, which is deemed strong compared to the 
reference value of the BI (52%) in the original UTAUT2 
model [73], showing that the proposed model has more pre-
dictive power than the original UTAUT2 model that predicts 
0.52 of the variation in behavioral intention [38]. Thus, the 
research findings showed the good predictive power of the 
proposed model for predicting HCP’s intentions to adopt 
CIoTHC.
The first step of the analysis showed that PE had a sig-
nificant effect on BI in the context of CIoTHC, which is 
consistent with existing literature in the technology-based 
healthcare adoption domain, such as UTAUT [74, 75], 
UTAUT2 [22, 76] and TAM [29, 77]. Consequently, HCPs 
who believe that CloudIoT would be helpful and productive 
in their work and can improve conventional healthcare sys-
tems are likelier to adopt such technology. The result also 
showed that EE significantly affected BI, consistent with 
existing literature on technology-based healthcare adoption 
[78, 79] and the original UTAUT2 model [38]. Therefore, 
HCPs who perceive the easiness of using CIoTHC are more 
likely to adopt it. Besides, SI was shown not significantly 
to influence BI in the CIoTHC adoption context. This result 
contradicts the current literature in the technology-based 
healthcare domain [80, 81], and the original UTAUT2 
model outcome [38]. This result might be due to the sensi-
tivity of the healthcare process, where HCPs are concerned 
about their patient’s lives and can’t use technology based 
on others’ opinions. In addition, FCs positively affected BI, 
implying that HCPs need technical infrastructure availability 
while heading toward BI. This result is consistent with the 
results of previous literature on technology-based healthcare 
adoption [19, 80, 81].
Moreover, the result confirmed that HB had a statisti-
cally significant impact on BI, in line with previous research 
studies in the e-health domain [45, 76]. Habit is more than 
just repeating one’s previous actions and routines; it may 
also contain qualities such as unintentionality and uncon-
trollability [82]. Consequently, HCPs whose habits control 
their behavior towards technology are more likely to adopt 
CIoTHC. Further, the result indicated that SE and PR sig-
nificantly influenced the BI, consistent with the previous 
e-health adoption literature [39, 57]. Therefore, HCP’s per-
ceptions of how safe and private the use of CloudIoT sys-
tems and means affect their adoption intention. The result 
also revealed that TR significantly impacted BI, which is 
consistent with current literature on the e-health domain. 
TR has been tested and confirmed as a prerequisite for end-
user’s acceptance of e-health in various empirical studies 
as an extension to several well-known technology accept-
ance theories, such as TAM [83, 84], UTAUT [19, 85], and 
UTAUT2 [39, 54]. Thus, HCPs’ acceptance of CIoTHC 
depends on their confidence in such technology. Finally, 
our results reveal that TC and UI were not associated with 
BI, which is inconsistent with the existing literature on the 
technology-based healthcare adoption domain [21, 24]. This 
result might be because HCPs are more cautious when deter-
mining whether to embrace specific technologies to protect 
the quality of healthcare services.
During the second step, the BN analysis revealed four 
new relationships among variables not considered in the 
proposed model, including the influence of EE on PE and 
the impacts of PR, FCs, and PE on TR. Incorporating these 
relationships into the proposed model revealed the role of 
TR in mediating the effect of PR, FCs, and PE on BI. Moreo-
ver, it showed that PE mediates the relationship between 
EE and BI. Thus, the resulting model was analyzed using 
SEM in the third step to statistically test and verify these 
relationships.
In addition to the results of step one, the third analysis 
step demonstrated EE’s significant influence on PE, congru-
ent with the existing e-health adoption literature [21, 86]. 
Consequently, a lower effort perception leads to a higher 
performance expectancy. The results also indicated that TR 
towards BI depends on three antecedent factors (FCs, PE, 
and PR). Further, compared to the PR and FCs, the PE con-
struct is the most important predictor that directly impacts 
TR (= 0.553 vs. 0.164 vs. 0.0.211). Thus, since CIoTHC 
is still an emerging technology, it’s not easy for HCPs to 
directly form trust with it because they lack direct experi-
ence or sufficient information. In such a case, HCPs with 


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
strong beliefs in (FCs, PR, and PE) are more likely to form 
trust toward CIoTHC.
7  Theoretical implications
Although many research studies have studied HCP’s adop-
tion of several systems and technologies, they haven’t 
addressed the CIoTHC adoption. Therefore, this research 
study investigated HCP’s behavioral intention to adopt 
CIoTHC. Thus, a new adoption object was added to the 
research area. Besides, by extending UTAUT2 with three 
additional factors, our study contributed to the technology-
based healthcare adoption area. More factors were added 
to UTAUT2, and new causal relations among variables 
were predicted by BN and verified by SEM in this empiri-
cal study, which goes beyond Venkatesh et al. [73] initial 
UTAUT2 model. In addition, this research adds to the IS 
adoption literature by introducing a new three-step approach 
to predicting HCP’s adoption of CIoTHC, which combines 
the benefits of BN and SEM approaches. Moreover, this 
research yielded credible results that may be generalized to 
the target population. Also, it developed the current adop-
tion research model, revealed the significant mediating role 
of TR, and explored the main factors that influence TR and 
BI in the CIoTHC context.
8  Practical implications
Several practical implications are inferred from this empiri-
cal study to aid stakeholder groups in better understand-
ing the factors supporting the adoption of CIoTHC. This 
research study shows that TR is the most statistically sig-
nificant determinant of CloudIoT adoption among HCPs, 
meaning enhancing trust in CIoTHC would attract HCPs. 
Besides, designers and developers can use these research 
results to increase the adoption of CIoTHC by integrating 
the factors contributing to the development of trust (per-
formance expectancy, privacy, and facilitating conditions) 
in the design and development phases. CIoTHC features 
and functionalities (PE) play an essential role in HCPs’ 
behavioral intentions. Thus, healthcare providers, develop-
ers, and designers should pay close attention to the features 
and functionalities they offer in their systems and how they 
may be tailored to meet the demands of various HCPs. In 
addition, given the cautiousness of HCPs about healthcare 
quality, FCs should be taken into consideration, where HCPs 
perceive the availability of such resources influences their 
behavioral intention.
Moreover, because of the sensitive nature of data stored 
and processed in CIoTHC, SE and PR significantly impact 
how HCPs perceive CIoTHC and, thus, their behavioral 
intentions. Developers and designers should pay special 
attention to the SE and PR measures included in the sys-
tems and ensure that HCPs are aware of these measures to 
ensure the data is safe and secure. Developers and designers 
should strike a balance between adding new features and 
ensuring the safety and security of the data. Besides, EE has 
a significant impact on the behavioral intentions of HCPs. 
Thus, it’s vital to design and develop CIoTHC systems that 
are simple and easy to use. Therefore, we propose that HCPs 
test a pilot application of the system to make adjustments 
during the development stage and boost the system’s accept-
ance. Furthermore, since habit is repeating one’s previous 
actions and routines because of learning, CIoTHC systems 
must provide customer support services to help and motivate 
HCPs to accept and use such systems.
9  Conclusion
In the healthcare industry 4.0, CIoTHC is one of the newest 
advancements in the technology healthcare environment dur-
ing the last years. Although the significant benefits offered 
by CIoTHC, its adoption rate is still low among HCPs. Thus, 
a research initiative to identify the critical factors driving 
the behavioral intention toward CIoTHC is essential. To this 
end, we proposed an extended UTAUT2 model to deter-
mine the significant factors affecting the HCP’s adoption of 
CIoTHC. Thus, we contribute to the body of knowledge on 
CIoTHC adoption in three ways:
1.	 This research is the first effort to offer beneficial insights 
into adopting CIoTHC in Jordan, a developing country.
2.	 Previous research studies have significantly overlooked 
end-user adoption of CIoTHC solutions. Thus, develop-
ing a theoretical adoption model, which is the primary 
contribution of this research, is deemed a beneficial tool.
3.	 Another contribution of this research in the informa-
tion systems adoption literature is introducing a new 
three-step strategy in predicting HCP’s adoption of 
CIoTHC, which combines the benefits of BN and SEM 
approaches.
Moreover, this research study confirms the roles of PE, 
EE, FCs, HB, TR, PR, and SE in technology-based health-
care adoption. SEM was utilized in the first analysis step to 
conduct the path analysis and test the postulated hypotheses. 
In the second analysis step, the significant factors produced 
by SEM were entered into the BN as inputs to predict the 
relations among these factors. In the third step, the SEM was 
used to analyze the causal relations of the modified model 
that resulted from steps 1 and 2.


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
10  Limitation and future work
One limitation of our study is that we did not investigate 
the actual usage of CIoTHC. Future research should inves-
tigate actual use to gain a more comprehensive understand-
ing of the adoption process. Additionally, our study only 
considered gender as a moderator variable among the fac-
tors. Future research could explore other variables, such as 
professional rank and age, which might impact the findings. 
Furthermore, the scope of our study was limited to Jordan. 
As CIoTHC adoption is a global phenomenon, it is crucial to 
replicate the study in diverse geographical contexts. Lastly, 
our research employed an online survey, and participants 
were selected using a combination of snowball and conveni-
ence sampling techniques. Therefore, future research can 
employ systematic and random-based sampling techniques 
to enhance the generalizability of the research model.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  I declare that there is no conflict of interest re-
garding the publication of this manuscript. The research conducted and 
the results presented in this manuscript are unbiased and free from 
any financial, personal, or professional conflicts of interest that could 
influence the objectivity, integrity, or interpretation of the findings. 
Furthermore, I confirm that all sources of financial support for this re-
search are disclosed within the manuscript, and there are no competing 
interests that could potentially undermine the credibility or validity of 
the research. If necessary, I am willing to provide additional informa-
tion or clarification regarding potential conflicts of interest related to 
this manuscript.
Appendix A
Questionnaires’ factors, items, and sourses
Factors
Items
Sources
Performance Expectancy 
(PE)
PE1: I find CIoTHC help-
ful in my job
[21, 37]
PE2: CIoTHC would allow 
me to work more quickly
PE3: Using CIoTHC 
would improve my work 
performance
PE4: Using CIoTHC 
would alleviate the work 
pressure
Factors
Items
Sources
Effort
Expectancy (EE)
EE1: I think the processes 
of CIoTHC are clear and 
intelligible
[21, 37]
EE2: I could learn to deal 
with CIoTHC quickly
EE3: I would be able to 
use CIoTHC easily
EE4: I could deal with 
CIoTHC skillfully
Social
Influence (SI)
SI1: I think my colleagues 
would want me to use 
CIoTHC
[21, 37]
SI2: I think my patients 
would want me to use 
CIoTHC
SI3: I think utilizing CIo-
THC is a predominant 
trend
Facilitating
Conditions (FC)
FC1: My hospital has the 
technical equipment and 
requisite resources to 
employ CIoTHC
[19, 37]
FC2: My hospital has a 
specialized group that 
is ready for assistance 
with CIoTHC difficulties 
(technical support staff)
FC3: I have the skills 
necessary to use CIoTHC 
(e.g., basic computer 
skills)
FC4: Other technologies I 
use are compatible with 
CIoTHC
Habit (HB)
HB1: For me, habit usu-
ally affects my behavior 
toward using technology
[45, 76]
HB2: For me, using 
CIoTHC could become 
a habit
HB3: I could become 
addicted to using CIo-
THC
Trust (TR)
TR1: I think CIoTHC 
could provide accurate 
health monitoring and 
analysis services
[21, 40, 85]
TR2: I think CIoTHC 
could provide reli-
able and safe assistant 
services
TR3: I think CIoTHC 
could provide conveni-
ent assistant healthcare 
services


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
Factors
Items
Sources
Privacy (PR)
PR1: I think the appropri-
ate authorization levels 
of access to data are 
employed in CIoTHC
[39, 87]
PR2: I think that my pri-
vate information would 
be protected in CIoTHC 
systems
PR3: I think that my 
patients’ data would be 
protected in CIoTHC 
systems
Security (SE)
SE: I think CIoTHC offers 
secure ways to share 
medical data
[8, 88]
SE2: I think CIoTHC has 
security measures to 
communicate accurate 
information
SE3: CIoTHC, in my 
opinion, has security 
measures in place to 
secure internal and exter-
nal communication from 
unauthorized users
SE4: I would feel secure 
when using CIoTHC
User Innovativeness (UI)
UI1: I’m always on the 
lookout for new techno-
logical innovations
[21, 76]
UI2: I’m always the first 
to try out the latest 
technologies among my 
peers
UI3: If I learned of a new 
technical product, I 
would try to figure out 
how to use it
UI4: Generally, I am 
willing to accept novel 
technology products
Task
Complexity (TC)
TC1: I believe that Clou-
dIoT’s analysis accuracy 
rate is greater than that 
of doctors
[21, 75]
TC2: I believe that 
CloudIoT’s analysis of 
patient’s data would be 
quicker than doctors
TC3: I often need to check 
a large amount of medi-
cal patient data
Factors
Items
Sources
Behavioral Intention (BI)
BI1: I intend to use CIo-
THC if I have a chance
[21, 37]
BI2: I would like to use 
CIoTHC as much as pos-
sible if I have a chance
BI3: I’m sure I would 
use CIoTHC in the near 
future
References
	 1.	 A. Higher H. C. of J. Hiasat (2019) The hashemite kingdom of 
Jordan the higher health council. World Heal Organ. 109
	 2.	 Madae S, Adeinat M (2018) The health sector in Jordan: effective-
ness and efficiency. Mod Appl Sci. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5539/​mas.​
v12n1​2p234
	 3.	 World Health Organization (2016) Global diffusion of eHealth: 
making universal health coverage achievable. [Online]. Available: 
http://​who.​int/​goe/​publi​catio​ns/​global_​diffu​sion/​en/
	 4.	 Bahbouh NM, Compte SS, Valdes JV, Sen AAA (2023) An empir-
ical investigation into the altering health perspectives in the inter-
net of health things. Int J Inf Technol 15(1):67–77
	 5.	 Altawaiha I, Atan R, Yaakob RB et al (2024) Assessing and pri-
oritizing crucial drivers for CloudIoT-based healthcare adoption: 
an analytic hierarchy process approach. Int J Inf Tecnol. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s41870-​024-​01742-z
	 6.	 Altawaiha I, Atan R, Bin Yaakob R, Bin Hj R (2022) Cloudiot-
based healthcare adoption by healthcare professionals: a concep-
tual model. J Theor Appl Inf Technol 100(23) 
	 7.	 Darwish A, Hassanien AE, Elhoseny M, Sangaiah AK, Muham-
mad K (2019) The impact of the hybrid platform of internet of 
things and cloud computing on healthcare systems: opportunities, 
challenges, and open problems. J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput 
10(10):4151–4166. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12652-​017-​0659-1
	 8.	 Idoga PE, Toycan M, Nadiri H, Çelebi E (2018) Factors affecting 
the successful adoption of e-health cloud based health system 
from healthcare consumers’ perspective. IEEE Access 6:71216–
71228. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACCESS.​2018.​28814​89
	 9.	 Aazam M, Khan I, Alsaffar AA, Huh E-N (2014) Cloud of things: 
integrating internet of things and cloud computing and the issues 
involved. In Proceedings of 2014 11th International Bhurban Con-
ference on Applied Sciences & Technology (IBCAST) Islamabad, 
Pakistan, 14th-18th January, 2014, IEEE, pp. 414–419
	10.	 Minh Dang L, Piran MJ, Han D, Min K, Moon H (2019) A survey 
on internet of things and cloud computing for healthcare. Electron 
8(7):768. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​elect​ronic​s8070​768
	11.	 Doukas, Maglogiannis I (2012) Bringing IoT and cloud computing 
towards pervasive healthcare. In 2012 Sixth International Confer-
ence on Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous 
Computing, IEEE, pp. 922–926
	12.	 Kumar P, Silambarasan K (2019) Enhancing the performance of 
healthcare service in IoT and cloud using optimized techniques. 
IETE J Res. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​03772​063.​2019.​16549​34
	13.	 Algharibi AJ, Arvanitis TN (2011) Adapting the unified theory of 
acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) as a tool for validat-
ing user needs on the implementation of e-Trial software systems. 
In Proceedings of HCI 2011 the 25th BCS conference on human 
computer interaction 25: 526–530


	
Int. j. inf. tecnol.
1 3
	14.	 Adenuga KI, Iahad NA, Miskon S (2017) Towards reinforcing 
telemedicine adoption amongst clinicians in Nigeria. Int J Med 
Inform 104:84–96
	15.	 Cilliers L, Flowerday S (2014) User acceptance of telemedicine 
by health care workers a case of the eastern cape province, South 
Africa. Electron J Inf Syst Dev Ctries 65(1):1–10
	16.	 Dünnebeil S, Sunyaev A, Blohm I, Leimeister JM, Krcmar H 
(2012) Determinants of physicians’ technology acceptance for 
e-health in ambulatory care. Int J Med Inform 81(11):746–760
	17.	 Rho MJ, Young Choi I, Lee J (2014) Predictive factors of telemed-
icine service acceptance and behavioral intention of physicians. 
Int J Med Inform 83(8):559–571
	18.	 Shiferaw KB, Mehari EA (2019) Modeling predictors of accept-
ance and use of electronic medical record system in a resource 
limited setting: using modified UTAUT model. Inform Med 
Unlocked 17:100182. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​imu.​2019.​100182
	19.	 Solangi ZA, Solangi YA, Maher ZA (2021) Adoption of IoT-based 
smart healthcare : an empirical analysis in the context of Pakistan
	20.	 Napitupulu D, Yacub R, Putra AHPK (2021) Factor influencing 
of telehealth acceptance during COVID-19 outbreak: extending 
UTAUT model. Int J Intell Eng Syst 14(3):267–281. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​22266/​ijies​2021.​0630.​23
	21.	 Fan W, Liu J, Zhu S, Pardalos PM (2020) Investigating the impact-
ing factors for the healthcare professionals to adopt artificial 
intelligence-based medical diagnosis support system (AIMDSS). 
Ann Oper Res 294(1–2):567–592. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s10479-​018-​2818-y
	22.	 Martins NLM, Duarte P, Pinho JCMR (2021) an Analysis of 
Determinants of the Adoption of Mobile Health (Mhealth). RAE 
Rev Adm Empres 61(4):1–17. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1590/​S0034-​
75902​02104​03x
	23.	 Ben Arfi W, Ben Nasr I, Kondrateva G, Hikkerova L (2021) The 
role of trust in intention to use the IoT in eHealth: application of 
the modified UTAUT in a consumer context. Technol Forecast 
Soc Change 167:120688. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2021.​
120688
	24.	 Hossain A, Quaresma R, Rahman H (2019) Investigating factors 
influencing the physicians’ adoption of electronic health record 
(EHR) in healthcare system of Bangladesh: an empirical study. Int 
J Inf Manage 44:76–87. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijinf​omgt.​2018.​
09.​016
	25.	 Alaiad A, Alsharo M, Alnsour Y (2019) The determinants of 
M-health adoption in developing countries: an empirical inves-
tigation. Appl Clin Inform 10(5):820–840. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1055/s-​0039-​16979​06
	26.	 Alharbi F (2021) The use of digital healthcare platforms during 
the COVID-19 pandemic: the consumer perspective. Acta Inform 
Medica 29(1):51–58. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5455/​AIM.​2021.​29.​51-​58
	27.	 Ben Arfi W, Ben Nasr I, Khvatova T, Ben Zaied Y (2021) Under-
standing acceptance of eHealthcare by IoT natives and IoT immi-
grants: an integrated model of UTAUT, perceived risk, and finan-
cial cost. Technol Forecast Soc Change 163:120437. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2020.​120437
	28.	 Petersen F, Luckan Z, Pather S (2020) Impact of demographics on 
patients’ acceptance of ICT for diabetes self-management: apply-
ing the UTAUT model in low socio-economic areas. 2020 Conf 
Inf Commun Technol Soc ICTAS 2020 - Proc, https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1109/​ICTAS​47918.​2020.​233975
	29.	 Papa A, Mital M, Pisano P, Del Giudice M (2020) “E-health and 
wellbeing monitoring using smart healthcare devices: an empirical 
investigation. Technol Forecast Soc Change 153:119226. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2018.​02.​018
	30.	 Kamal SA, Shafiq M, Kakria P (2020) Investigating acceptance of 
telemedicine services through an extended technology acceptance 
model (TAM). Technol Soc 60:101212. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
techs​oc.​2019.​101212
	31.	 Wu L, Li J-Y, Fu C-Y (2011) The adoption of mobile healthcare by 
hospital’s professionals: an integrative perspective. Decis Support 
Syst 51(3):587–596
	32.	 Yang Z, Kankanhalli A, Ng B-Y, Lim JTY (2013) Analyzing the 
enabling factors for the organizational decision to adopt healthcare 
information systems. Decis Support Syst 55(3):764–776
	33.	 Rogers EM, Singhal A, Quinlan MM (2014) Diffusion of innova-
tions. Routledge, England
	34.	 Chew F, Grant W, Tote R (2004) Doctors on-line: using diffusion 
of innovations theory to understand internet use. Fam Med City 
36:645–650
	35.	 Goodhue DL, Thompson RL (1995) Task-technology fit and indi-
vidual performance. MIS Q 19:213–236
	36.	 Wang H, Tao D, Yu N, Qu X (2020) Understanding consumer 
acceptance of healthcare wearable devices: an integrated model 
of UTAUT and TTF. Int J Med Inform 139:104156
	37.	 Venkatesh V, Morris MG, Davis GB, Davis FD (2003) User 
acceptance of information technology: toward a unified view. MIS 
Q 27(3):425–478. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​30036​540
	38.	 Venkatesh V, Thong JYL, Xu X (2012) Consumer acceptance 
and use of information technology: extending the unified theory 
of acceptance and use of technology. MIS Q 36:157–178
	39.	 Alam MZ, Hu W, Kaium MA, Hoque MR, Alam MMD (2020) 
Understanding the determinants of mHealth apps adoption in 
Bangladesh: a SEM-Neural network approach. Technol Soc 
61:101255. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techs​oc.​2020.​101255
	40.	 Semiz BB, Semiz T (2021) Examining consumer use of mobile 
health applications by the extended UTAUT model. Bus Manag 
Stud An Int J 9(1):267–281. https://​doi.​org/​10.​15295/​bmij.​v9i1.​
1773
	41.	 Dwivedi YK, Rana NP, Jeyaraj A, Clement M, Williams MD 
(2019) Re-examining the unified theory of acceptance and use 
of technology (UTAUT): towards a revised theoretical model. Inf 
Syst Front 21(3):719–734
	42.	 Kao YS, Nawata K, Huang CY (2019) An exploration and confir-
mation of the factors influencing adoption of IoT-basedwearable 
fitness trackers. Int J Environ Res Public Health. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3390/​ijerp​h1618​3227
	43.	 Song C (2022) A hybrid SEM and ANN approach to predict the 
individual cloud computing adoption based on the UTAUT2. Int 
J Inf Technol 14(7):3539–3553
	44.	 Talukder MS, Sorwar G, Bao Y, Ahmed JU, Palash MAS (2020) 
Predicting antecedents of wearable healthcare technology accept-
ance by elderly: a combined SEM-neural network approach. Tech-
nol Forecast Soc Change 150:119793. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
techf​ore.​2019.​119793
	45.	 Owusu Kwateng K, Appiah C, Atiemo KAO (2021) Adoption of 
health information systems: health professionals perspective. Int 
J Healthc Manag 14(2):517–533. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​20479​
700.​2019.​16720​04
	46.	 Kim TB, Ho CTB (2021) Validating the moderating role of age in 
multi-perspective acceptance model of wearable healthcare tech-
nology. Telemat Informatics 61:101603. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
tele.​2021.​101603
	47.	 Panicker RO, Sabu MK (2020) Factors influencing the adoption 
of computerized medical diagnosing system for tuberculosis. Int 
J Inf Technol 12:503–512
	48.	 Beh PK, Ganesan Y, Iranmanesh M, Foroughi B (2021) Using 
smartwatches for fitness and health monitoring: the UTAUT2 
combined with threat appraisal as moderators. Behav Inf Technol 
40(3):282–299. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​01449​29X.​2019.​16855​97
	49.	 Vichitkraivin P, Naenna T (2021) Factors of healthcare robot 
adoption by medical staff in Thai government hospitals. 
Health Technol (Berl) 11(1):139–151. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s12553-​020-​00489-4


Int. j. inf. tecnol.	
1 3
	50.	 Chávez Herting D, Cladellas Pros R, Castelló Tarrida A (2020) Habit 
and social influence as determinants of PowerPoint use in higher 
education: a study from a technology acceptance approach. Interact 
Learn Environ. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​10494​820.​2020.​17990​21
	51.	 Kavandi H, Jaana M (2020) Factors that affect health information 
technology adoption by seniors: a systematic review. Health Soc 
Care Community 28(6):1827–1842
	52.	 Moorman C, Deshpande R, Zaltman G (1993) Factors affecting 
trust in market research relationships. J Mark 57(1):81–101
	53.	 Patil RY (2023) A secure privacy preserving and access control 
scheme for medical internet of things (MIoT) using attribute-
based signcryption. Int J Inf Technol. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s41870-​023-​01569-0
	54.	 Gu D et al (2021) Assessing the adoption of e-health technology in 
a developing country: an extension of the UTAUT model. SAGE 
Open. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​21582​44021​10275​65
	55.	 Soceanu A, Vasylenko M, Egner A, Muntean T (2015) Managing 
the privacy and security of eHealth data. Proc-2015 20th Int Conf 
Control Syst Comput Sci CSCS, pp. 439–446, 2015, https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1109/​CSCS.​2015.​76
	56.	 Jain S, Doriya R (2022) Security framework to healthcare robots 
for secure sharing of healthcare data from cloud. Int J Inf Technol 
14(5):2429–2439
	57.	 Hartono IK, Della TK, Kawi YA, Yuniarty L (2021) Determinants 
factor affecting user continuance usage and intention to recom-
mend of mobile telemedicine. IOP Conf Ser Earth Environ Sci. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1088/​1755-​1315/​794/1/​012079
	58.	 Parasuraman A (2000) Technology readiness index (TRI): a mul-
tipleitem scale to measure readiness to embrace new technologies. 
J Serv Res 2:307
	59.	 Yi Y, Tung LL, Wu Z (2003) Incorporating technology readiness 
(TR) Into TAM : are individual traits important to understand 
technology acceptance ? Digit 2003 Proc. 2(2): 1–27, http://​aisel.​
aisnet.​org/​digit​2003/2
	60.	 Walczuch R, Lemmink J, Streukens S (2007) The effect of service 
employees’ technology readiness on technology acceptance. Inf 
Manag 44(2):206–215. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​im.​2006.​12.​005
	61.	 Gallupe RB, DeSanctis G, Dickson GW (1988) Computer-based 
support for group problem-finding: an experimental investigation. 
MIS Q 12:277–296
	62.	 Saunders M, Lewis P, Thornhill A (2009) Research methods for 
business students, 5th ed
	63.	 Anderson JC, Gerbing DW (1988) Structural equation modeling in 
practice: a review and recommended two-step approach. Psychol 
Bul 103(3):411
	64.	 Ben-Gal I (2008) Bayesian networks. Encyclopedia of statistics 
in quality and reliability. Wiley, Hoboken
	65.	 Bayesia SAS (2018) BayesiaLab 10-Bayesian networks for 
research and analytics. http://​www.​bayes​ialab.​com
	66.	 Kock N, Lynn G (2012) Lateral collinearity and misleading results 
in variance-based SEM: an illustration and recommendations. J 
Assoc Inf Sys. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17705/​1jais.​00302
	67.	 Henseler J et al (2014) Common beliefs and reality about PLS: 
comments on Rönkkö and Evermann (2013). Organ Res Methods 
17(2):182–209
	68.	 Henseler J, Ringle CM, Sinkovics RR (2009) The use of partial least 
squares path modeling in international marketing. New challenges to 
international marketing. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, Bingely
	69.	 Hair JF, Black WC, Babin BJ, Anderson RE, Tatham RL (2006) 
Multivariate data analysis 6
	70.	 Jr Hair JF, Sarstedt M, Ringle CM, Gudergan SP (2017) Advanced 
issues in partial least squares structural equation modeling. saGe 
publications, Thousand Oaks
	71.	 Sarstedt M, Ringle CM, Henseler J, Hair JF (2014) On the eman-
cipation of PLS-SEM: a commentary on Rigdon (2012). Long 
Range Plann 47(3):154–160
	72.	 Chin WW (1998) Commentary: issues and opinion on structural 
equation modeling. MIS quarterly. JSTOR, pp. vii–xvi
	73.	 Hair JF, Ringle CM, Sarstedt M (2011) PLS-SEM: indeed a silver 
bullet. J Mark theory Pract 19(2):139–152
	74.	 Hoque R, Sorwar G (2017) Understanding factors influencing the 
adoption of mHealth by the elderly: an extension of the UTAUT 
model. Int J Med Inform 101:75–84. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
ijmed​inf.​2017.​02.​002
	75.	 Luyten J, Marneffe W (2021) Examining the acceptance of an 
integrated electronic health records system: insights from a 
repeated cross-sectional design. Int J Med Inform 150:104450. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijmed​inf.​2021.​104450
	76.	 Baudier P, Kondrateva G, Ammi C (2020) The future of Tel-
emedicine Cabin? The case of the French students’ acceptabil-
ity. Futures 122:102595. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​futur​es.​2020.​
102595
	77.	 Dhagarra D, Goswami M, Kumar G (2020) Impact of trust and 
privacy concerns on technology acceptance in healthcare: an 
Indian perspective. Int J Med Inform 141:104164. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​ijmed​inf.​2020.​104164
	78.	 Koivumäki T, Pekkarinen S, Lappi M, Vaïsänen J, Juntunen J, 
Pikkarainen M (2017) Consumer adoption of future mydata-based 
preventive ehealth services: an acceptance model and survey 
study. J Med Internet Res 19(12):1–15. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2196/​
jmir.​7821
	79.	 Tavares J, Oliveira T (2016) Electronic health record patient por-
tal adoption by health care consumers: an acceptance model and 
survey. J Med Internet Res. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2196/​jmir.​5069
	80.	 Bawack RE, Kala Kamdjoug JR (2018) Adequacy of UTAUT in 
clinician adoption of health information systems in developing 
countries: the case of Cameroon. Int J Med Inform 109:15–22. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijmed​inf.​2017.​10.​016
	81.	 Jayaseelan R, Koothoor P, Pichandy C (2020) Technology accept-
ance by medical doctors in india: an analysis with UTAUT model. 
Int J Sci Technol Res 9(1):3854–3857
	82.	 Verplanken B (2006) Beyond frequency: habit as mental con-
struct. Br J Soc Psychol 45(3):639–656
	83.	 Werber B, Baggia A, Žnidaršič A (2018) Factors affecting the 
intentions to use RFID subcutaneous microchip implants for 
healthcare purposes. Organizacija 51(2):121–133. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​2478/​orga-​2018-​0010
	84.	 Nusairat NM et al (2021) Determinants of behavioral intentions 
to use mobile healthcare applications in Jordan. Int J Data Netw 
Sci 5(4):547–556. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5267/j.​ijdns.​2021.8.​013
	85.	 Pal D, Funilkul S, Charoenkitkarn N, Kanthamanon P (2018) 
Internet-of-things and smart homes for elderly healthcare: an end 
user perspective. IEEE Access 6:10483–10496. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1109/​ACCESS.​2018.​28084​72
	86.	 Huarng KH, Yu THK, Fang Lee C (2022) Adoption model of 
healthcare wearable devices. Technol Forecast Soc Change. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2021.​121286
	87.	 Chang Y, Wong SF, Libaque-Saenz CF, Lee H (2018) The role 
of privacy policy on consumers’ perceived privacy. Gov Inf Q 
35(3):445–459. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​giq.​2018.​04.​002
	88.	 Khalilzadeh J, Ozturk AB, Bilgihan A (2017) Security-related 
factors in extended UTAUT model for NFC based mobile pay-
ment in the restaurant industry. Comput Human Behav 70(Janu-
ary):460–474. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2017.​01.​001
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law.


