# 6. 연구논문_Application of cluster analysis to identify different reader groups through their engagement with a digital reading supplement

---
**Source:** [[6. 연구논문_Application of cluster analysis to identify different reader groups through their engagement with a digital reading supplement.pdf]]
**Category:** #mba #ai
**Imported:** 2026-03-05

Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
Available online 29 February 2024
0360-1315/©
2024
The
Authors.
Published
by
Elsevier
Ltd.
This
is
an
open
access
article
under
the
CC
BY
license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Application of cluster analysis to identify different reader groups 
through their engagement with a digital reading supplement☆ 
Yawen Ma a,*, Kate Cain b, Anastasia Ushakova a 
a Centre for Health Informatics, Computing, and Statistics, Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom 
b Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Early years education 
Data science applications in education 
Games 
A B S T R A C T   
The focus of this study is the identification of reader profiles that differ in performance and 
progression in an educational literacy app. A total of 19,830 students in Grade 2 from 347 
Elementary schools located in 30 different districts in the United States played the app from 2020 
to 2021. Our aim was to identify unique groups of readers using an unsupervised statistical 
learning technique - cluster analysis. Six indicators generated from the students’ log files were 
included to provide insights into engagement and learning across four different reading-related 
skills: phonological awareness, early decoding, vocabulary, and comprehension processes. A 
key aim was to evaluate the implementation and performance of Gaussian mixture models, k- 
means, k-medoids, clustering large applications and hierarchical clustering, alongside provision 
of detailed guidance that can benefit researchers in the field. K-means algorithm performed the 
best and identified nine groups of readers. Children with low initial reading ability showed 
greater engagement with code-related games (phonological awareness, early decoding) and took 
longer to master these games, whereas children with higher initial ability showed more 
engagement with meaning-related games (vocabulary, comprehension processes). Our findings 
can inform further research that aims to understand individual differences in learning behaviour 
within digital environments both over time and across various cohorts of children.   
1. Introduction 
National efforts in the U.S. (e.g., Common Core (National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State 
School Officers, 2010); the No Child Left Behind (The No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, 2002)) have not resulted in substantial 
improvements in literacy performance (Guterres, 2020). Lower academic performance continues to persist among minority students 
and those from low-income backgrounds (de Brey et al., 2019; Department for Education, 2019). Using digital tools for reading 
supplements has been found to result in better outcomes, effectively enhancing standard classroom practices (Biancarosa & Griffiths, 
2012). It is therefore critical to understand under what conditions digital learning can support literacy development. 
Digital games that aid literacy acquisition have some of the characteristics of computer games, so insights from the analysis of 
computer game player behaviour data may be informative. First, computer games include progression through different skill levels. 
Second, they generate a high volume of data, including both accuracy and time data at the item level for each player during 
☆Application of cluster analysis to identify different reader groups through their engagement with a digital reading supplement 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: y.ma24@lancaster.ac.uk (Y. Ma), k.cain@lancaster.ac.uk (K. Cain), a.ushakova@lancaster.ac.uk (A. Ushakova).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Computers & Education 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/compedu 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2024.105025 
Received 22 November 2023; Received in revised form 23 January 2024; Accepted 23 February 2024   


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
2
engagement with the game, across sessions on multiple days. Tracking user behaviour in real-time, as they play, helps game developers 
identify popular game elements or design flaws and different players’ profiles, all of which can inform product development (Isbister & 
Schaffer, 2008; S´anchez et al., 2012). The analytic techniques used to study engagement with games designed for entertainment could 
be applied to educational games, with the results used to drive theory and recommendations for how to use digital supplements 
beneficially, in the classroom. The aim of this study is to explore reading engagement profiles and their relation to reading outcomes in 
a digital app. 
1.1. Reading and literacy development 
Reading comprehension is considered the product of a reader’s decoding (word reading) skill and listening comprehension (Gough 
& Tunmer, 1986; Hoover & Gough, 1990). There is significant evidence of a strong relationship between decoding and reading 
comprehension, particularly in younger readers (e.g., Language and Reading Research Consortium (LARRC) (2015)). In terms of 
underlying skills, children’s progress in decoding is correlated with early phonological awareness (e.g., Adams, 1990; Goswami & 
Bryant, 1990; National Reading Panel, 2000; Snow et al., 1998), and their progress in listening and reading comprehension is strongly 
predicted by vocabulary (Anderson & Freebody, 1981) and the comprehension processes skills that support multi-clause sentence and 
single text comprehension (Oakhill & Cain, 2012). This evidence informed the design of the app’s games and provided an empirical 
and theoretical basis for our exploration of games targeting four skills, namely phonological awareness, early decoding, vocabulary, 
and comprehension processes. Recent studies have confirmed that digital reading games can aid the development of (some of these) 
specific skills that underpin reading development, such as phonological awareness and vocabulary (e.g., Hofmann, 2021; 
L´opez-Escribano et al., 2021; Vnucko & Klimova, 2023) and the need to consider reader characteristics, such as age, ability, gender etc. 
(e.g., Benton et al., 2023; Diprossimo et al., 2023). 
1.2. Data driven potential measures of engagement with educational games 
Expert performance does not simply arise from innate aptitude, but from sustained regular deliberate practice, which is often time 
limited (Ericsson et al., 1993). Regular and active engagement in language learning is encouraged to improve literacy ability (Wyse 
et al., 2013), and motivation and engagement contribute to improve learning outcomes (Kuh, 2009; Lepper et al., 2005; Schlechty, 
2001; Woolfolk, 2007). Students’ engagement with a digital learning game can be measured by the behavioural indicators which 
represent the time and effort they put into it. These can be quantified as the time and frequency of training, number of levels of 
interaction, etc. 
Dynamic behavioural data can accurately describe the time and, by proxy, the effort that students dedicate to a target skill. A 
relevant study to investigate this dimension of engagement was conducted by Yang et al. (2020) who used six interactive e-book user 
log variables to identify a student’s in-the-moment reading processes. They found that log variables, such as time spent reading, 
frequency of reading the book, and number of attempts to get the correct answer, were associated with word knowledge and strategic 
reading outcomes. In other work, time spent reading has been found to relate significantly to improvements in pupils’ reading 
achievement (Locher & Pfost, 2020). It has been proposed that time spent reading may indicate ‘careful reading’ and the depth of 
involvement in learning word knowledge (Laufer & Hulstijn, 2001). Ciampa (2012) used reading frequency as an indicator of moti­
vation, since students who read more frequently could have higher levels of motivation (Laufer & Hulstijn, 2001). The number of 
attempts that pupils make to get the right answer reflects their strategic approach; the more attempts they need before they get the 
right answer, the less strategic they are being, indicating that they are “gaming the system” or guessing and checking (Baker et al., 
2004, 2008). 
This range of engagement measures has not been explored comprehensively in previous work. Furthermore, how to use and 
interpret these variables is not clear because they may differ by skill, for example, it is unlikely that there is a single threshold of 
frequency that is suitable for all skills (Du et al., 2021). No studies, to date, have summarised a generalised set of engagement variables 
for digital educational games. Furthermore, from the perspective of output variables, none captures information such as correctness or 
speed of mastery. Therefore, before proceeding to explore the relationship between behaviour and learning outcomes, a suitable way 
to take into account the effort that students put into the different skills and to rescale the values of engagement variables for different 
skills on a common scale is needed. 
1.3. Relationship between engagement with and performance on educational games 
Some studies report a significant correlation between student engagement and learning gains (Agudo-Peregrina et al., 2014; 
G´omez-Aguilar et al., 2015), and have used student engagement with a specific app to predict learning outcomes, such as the final test 
results. For example, Zheng et al. (2020) found a positive correlation between the number of logins for online English and literature 
courses and final outcomes of K-12 students in the U.S. (see also, Liang et al., 2014; Liao & Wu, 2023). This previous work has focused 
on high-school and undergraduate students, who have already mastered the basics of reading. The current study is unique in its focus 
on beginner readers, to determine if and how engagement profiles explain performance and progress in the initial stages of reading 
development. 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
3
1.4. Motivation of the study and research questions 
Successful reading comprehension relies on many processes including decoding the written words, retrieving their meanings, 
computing sentence structures, and integrating information across these sentences and with a reader’s general knowledge, to build up 
a coherent representation of the text’s meaning (Perfetti et al., 2005). We focus on four skills that underpin two critical aspects of 
reading development: code-related skills (phonological awareness, early decoding) and meaning-related skills (vocabulary, compre­
hension processes). We seek to determine if engagement with these two skill sets indicates distinct clusters of children, by utilizing a 
high-volume and unstructured dataset obtained from an educational literacy app. We then explore how engagement is related to 
performance on these games, children’s initial literacy skill, and their general progress in reading comprehension across the year. We 
also examine whether any specific demographic variables are associated with different groups of children. 
To identify distinct reader profiles, we draw on analytic techniques used in the analysis of computer games – cluster analysis 
(Vardal et al., 2022). Cluster analysis, as an unsupervised technique, is well-suited for effective identification of underlying patterns in 
vast and unstructured datasets. Clustering methods have been used previously to explore academic development and learning by 
different types of learners (Howard et al., 2018; Liao & Wu, 2023; Lim et al., 2022; Saqr & L´opez-Pernas, 2021; Wang et al., 2023). For 
example, Sparks et al. (2012) found that the k-means clustering identified three distinct cognitive and achievement profiles of second 
language learners based on 11 cognitive variables including participants’ scores. To date, studies using clustering have typically 
focused on the application of a single technique, without surveying and comparing various methods available to cluster the data. To 
address this, we evaluated the application of Gaussian mixture models, partitioning around medoids, clustering large application and 
hierarchical clustering, alongside the commonly used k-means method. 
Our aims are twofold. First, to propose and demonstrate the utility of a novel analytical framework that utilizes the potential 
offered through rich log files to understand users’ behaviour and application in the context of our dataset. Second, to provide guidance 
about implementation of clustering techniques that can be used to address similar research questions with datasets of similar structure. 
This work can support additional research objectives, such as understanding how different individuals and cohorts may vary in 
measured behaviours, for example engagement and performance, over time. 
Our research is not driven by a framework of hypothesis testing but is exploratory in nature, driven by the aim to track language and 
literacy development and identify distinct group of learners. The results have the potential to improve our understanding about what 
user engagement and performance can tell us about learners and their behaviour. Such investigations also have the potential to inform 
targeted support for children to foster their development. Our research questions are as follows:  
• (1) Do different cluster techniques effectively discern heterogeneous groups, such as distinctive reader cohorts, within massive and 
unstructured datasets?  
• (2) Do the patterns of engagement make sense in relation to theory and previous research?  
• (3) Is engagement related to performance?  
• (4) Is there a relation between engagement, performance, and student demographics?  
• (5) Does the behaviour within and between clusters relate to the programme architecture? 
2. Methods 
2.1. Research context and participants 
The dataset was supplied from a supplemental digital literacy education program - Boost Reading, designed to support the 
development of core reading skills and concepts to students in kindergarten to Grade 5 through a variety of games. Boost Reading is 
designed to help children to learn to read (e.g., see https://amplify.com/research-and-case-studies/boost-reading-research/; Newton 
et al., 2019). It comprises a variety of games, each focusing on different skills that previous research has shown to be critical to the 
reading development and success (e.g., Language and Reading Research Consortium (LARRC) & Logan, J, 2017; Oakhill & Cain, 2012). 
It uses adaptive technology allowing students to practice the skills they need at their own level and has recommended, but not pre­
scribed, weekly usage. Thus, it allows us to study the development of both word reading and reading comprehension in beginner 
readers, and the relation between engagement and performance. A different part of the dataset for an independent project has been 
previously analysed and published by Diprossimo et al. (2023). 
The original dataset comprised 43,900 students’ behaviour across K to Grade 5. For this paper, we used a subsample of 19,830 
students in Grade 2 Elementary schools who played the app from 2020 to 2021. We focused on Grade 2 students to capture the initial 
stages of reading acquisition, which is a strong predictor of later reading comprehension (Oakhill & Cain, 2012; Verhoeven et al., 
2011). Grade 2 students were exposed to a larger variety of games in terms of skill development in the app relative to other grades, 
allowing for a comprehensive investigation of patterns of user engagement and performance across core skills. The students were 
located in 347 different schools across 30 different districts, largely in REDACTED FOR REVIEW. A range of indicators available from 
student log files were used alongside social demographic data to provide insights into engagement and learning across different 
reading-related skills. A rigorous data cleaning process ensured sufficient data points for the main analyses. We ensured that the final 
dataset included data only from students who played for a sufficient amount of time to produce meaningful profiles for analyses. We 
also ensured that the included students had observations spread across the year and across a variety of games to enable meaningful 
investigation of progress over time whilst ensuring sufficient variation in engagement and performance measures. Our analysis plan 
was preregistered (https://osf.io/3fhye). 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
4
2.2. Data sources 
From a theory-driven perspective, our research focuses on four key skills that are essential for reading comprehension: two code- 
related skills that support word reading, phonological awareness and early decoding, and two meaning-related skills that support 
reading comprehension, vocabulary and comprehension processes. The app has a hierarchical structure that results in a hierarchical 
structure of the dataset: skills at the top, followed by games within those skills, levels within the games, attempts, and items within the 
levels. A total of 30 different games that were played by our sample of Grade 2 users were designed to practice our four target skills, 
accounting for 54.5% of the total number of games played. We considered data from all of these games: 5 for phonological awareness, 8 
for early decoding, 6 for vocabulary, and 11 for comprehension processes. Each game has multiple levels, and a student must complete 
multiple items within one level to pass to the next. For each level, multiple attempts are allowed. For each attempt, the automatically 
generated log file provides information on user behaviours and includes: the number of total items attempted, the number of correctly 
answered items, information on whether the student mastered the level, and scores that are represented by an overall ratio of correct to 
total items. There are also time related variables such as: the elapsed time and timestamps indicating start and end time for each 
attempt. These variables are described in the supplementary materials (Table S1). 
It is important to note the mechanism underpinning students’ progress within the app. Typically, after mastering a level, pupils are 
presented with the next level. However, some pupils do not master the level after three attempts. In such instances, that level (and, 
therefore, the game) is removed from their content for some time. Later, the app puts the student back to the same level of that specific 
game. Such features not only make each user’s journey unique, but also provide personalised training to strengthen each user’s skills. 
Thus, the results of each level and assessment reflect a more realistic personal performance for each user. 
An out-of-game assessment, Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills (DIBELS, 8th edition, University of Oregon, Centre on 
Teaching and Learning, 2018) was administered to capture each child’s initial ability at the start of Grade 2. These scores were used to 
classify students into four performance levels: ‘well below benchmark’, ‘below benchmark’, ‘at benchmark’, and ‘above benchmark’. 
These categories were used to place students at an appropriate starting level in the app. 
To provide a measure that captures progress and development of reading comprehension, the app includes a game designed 
specifically to measure reading comprehension on a monthly basis, a cloze task called Mind the Gap (see supplementary materials 
Table S1). The difficulty level of content for this game was designed to be comparable across the year, such that increased scores 
indicate improved performance. Unlike other games in the app, users have only one attempt (each month), which is time-limited (to 3 
min). Scores on this game can be used for overall progress monitoring. Scores on Mind the Gap that either stay the same or improve 
indicate growth. Performance may also indicate individual disparities in reading ability at the beginning of a student’s interaction with 
the app, allowing us to capture individual differences in trajectories of learning. We used scores on this game as a reference point of 
users’ performance and a validation measure to understand overall learning progress in the app. 
2.3. Engagement indicators 
Our choice of engagement indicators was informed by the literature (e.g., Du et al., 2021; Henrie et al., 2015; Sinatra et al., 2015; 
Yang et al., 2020). We created six game-based indicators to summarise information across usage, considering both the nature of the 
game and the data, while avoiding redundancy: all hours spent, variety of games played, all attempts, the number of levels played, days of 
playing, and proportion of early exit rounds. These are listed in the appendices (Table A1). These variables were fed into our exploratory 
analyses to explore variation across various skills, games, and users themselves. 
3. Data analysis 
We summarise the stages involved in the data analysis in Fig. 1. Each step is detailed below, and will be referred to in the data 
analysis and results sections. 
The clustering analyses aggregated performance across the entire year of activity. All statistical analyses were conducted using 
openly available software R (R Core Team, 2021). We utilized the factoextra package to perform partitioning clustering, hierarchical 
clustering, as well as visualization and silhouette coefficients of the clustering results (Kassambara & Mundt, 2016). To determine the 
optimal number of clusters, we employed the mclust package and examined the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) results generated 
by model-based clustering with various cluster numbers (Fraley & Raftery, 1998, 2006). R package fpc was used to compute two 
metrics for cluster validation – Dunn index and within clusters sum of squares (Hennig, 2023). Data pre-processing was conducted 
Table 1 
The validation results using three internal validation metrics for five clustering methods.  
Clustering methods 
Internal validation metrics 
Silhouette coefficient 
Dunn index 
Within clusters sum of squares (WCSS) 
Gaussian mixture models (GMM) 
−0.03 
0.001 
262873.5 
K-means 
0.17 
0.001 
181402.3 
K-medoids (partition around medoids (PAM)) 
0.13 
0.002 
194398.9 
Clustering large applications (CLARA) 
0.09 
0.001 
202077.8 
Hierarchical clustering 
0.67 
0.213 
443703.3  
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
5
Fig. 1. 8 Steps of data analysis for the two aims of our study.  
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
6
using tidyverse and dplyr packages (Wickham, Averick, et al., 2019; Wickham, François, et al., 2019). 
3.1. Step 1: data pre-processing 
Our steps to ensure data quality are outlined in Fig. 1, Step 1. We constructed indicators of engagement in the app using the 
available data. To homogenise the size and variability of these input variables, the built-in-R function “scale” was used for stand­
ardising across the six engagement variables, involving the conversion each original value into a z-score (Milligan & Cooper, 1988). 
3.2. Step 2: Cluster algorithms 
To select the best model for our data and the optimal number of clusters K, we used Gaussian mixture models and the Bayesian 
Information Criterion (BIC; Fraley & Raftery, 1998), where higher values of BIC indicate better fit (Bozdogan, 1987; Kvapil et al., 2022; 
Schwarz, 1978). Once the optimal number of clusters was determined, we compared the following widely-used clustering methods: (1) 
Model-based clustering analysis (Gaussian mixture models); (2) Partition clustering (k-means, k-medoids, clustering large applica­
tions); and (3) hierarchical clustering (see Banfield & Raftery, 1993; Hastie et al., 2009; Kaufman & Rousseeuw, 1990; MacQueen, 
1967). 
3.2.1. Model-based clustering analysis (Gaussian mixture models) 
In this approach, data are viewed as coming from a mixture of probability distributions, each representing a different cluster. The 
same object could be assigned to more than one cluster by Gaussian mixture models. Hence it is a soft clustering algorithm, distinct 
from hard clustering algorithms such as partition clustering (e.g., k-means, k-medoids and CLARA) and hierarchical clustering. Each 
cluster is modelled by the normal or Gaussian distribution which is characterised by the parameters (e.g., mean and variance). 
3.2.2. Partition clustering 
Partition clustering classifies objects into multiple groups (i.e., clusters), such that objects within the same cluster are as similar as 
possible and objects from different clusters are as dissimilar as possible. A partitioning algorithm divides a dataset into a set of disjoint 
partitions, with each partition representing each cluster. We used k-means, k-medoids and clustering large applications based on this 
approach. 
3.2.2.1. K-means. K-means works by assigning the mean of points to the centre of each cluster. The results may be sensitive to the 
initial random selection of cluster centres, because the choice of the distinct set of initial centres will lead to different clustering results 
on different runs of the algorithm. K-means clustering is the most widely-used unsupervised machine learning algorithm due to its 
simple and efficient features and has been used previously as a clustering method in digital learning environments (Liao & Wu, 2023; 
Moubayed et al., 2020). 
3.2.2.2. K-medoids (partition around medoids). K-medoids clustering is considered more robust than k-means (Park & Jun 2009). Each 
cluster is represented by a selected object within the cluster, which is the most centrally located point in each cluster: a medoid. 
Clusters are defined so that the medoid (an object) within a cluster is one for which the average dissimilarity between itself and all the 
other points is minimal. The partition around medoids (PAM) algorithm is the most common k-medoids clustering method. K 
representative medoids among the observations are identified, clusters are constructed by allocating the remaining observations to the 
nearest medoids. Next, the selected object (medoids) and non-selected objects are swapped to improve the quality of clustering by 
minimizing the sum of the dissimilarities of all objects to their closest representative object. 
3.2.2.3. Clustering large applications (CLARA). To address the computational storage challenges posed by the PAM algorithm for large 
datasets, clustering large applications (CLARA) can be considered. The difference between the algorithms is that PAM searches for 
medoids within the entire dataset, whilst CLARA considers a small, fixed size sample of the dataset and applies the PAM algorithm to 
generate the optimal medoids for the sample. To reduce sampling bias, CLARA repeats the clustering and sampling procedures a pre- 
specified number of times. The set of medoids with the minimal objective function is represented by the final clustering results. The 
objective function corresponds to the sum of the dissimilarities of the observations to their nearest medoids, which is also a measure of 
the goodness of the clustering. 
3.2.3. Hierarchical clustering 
Hierarchical clustering divides a dataset into a sequence of nested partitions. Agglomerative clustering is the most common type of 
hierarchical clustering and works in a “bottom-up” manner. The algorithm starts by treating each object as a single-element cluster 
(leaf), then the most similar pairs of clusters are successively combined into a bigger cluster using the linkage function until all clusters 
have been merged into one big cluster (root) containing all objects. 
3.3. Step 3: Cluster validation 
Although the outlined clustering methods may appear quite different in terms of their underlying mechanisms, a variety of 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
7
validation metrics can be used to compare across all to assess the goodness of the clustering algorithm results. We used three quan­
titative evaluations to assess cluster validity and provide indications of how well the clustering fits the data: silhouette width, Dunn 
index, and within cluster sum of squares (Halkidi et al., 2015; Theodoridis & Koutroumbas, 2006). Selection of the best clustering 
solution optimised simultaneously maximal within-group homogeneity while maintaining meaningful between group heterogeneity 
or, in simple words, ensuring that resulting clusters were as distinct as possible from each other. It is not uncommon for clustering 
results to be sensitive to data structure and initiation data points. Thus, to complement numerical metrics we also used insights from 
the field to guide the selection of the best clustering solution considering what we know about expected patterns of associations 
between engagement and performance. 
4. Results 
4.1. Sample characteristics & engagement descriptive statistics 
The initial DIBELS results indicated that most users in the sample were in ‘well below benchmark’ (40%) and ‘at benchmark’ initial 
reading ability groups (27%). The proportion of males and females was balanced. Most of the children were non-English language 
learners (non-ELL) (62%) and non-special education needs (non-SEN) students (81%). The highest proportion of races were Hispanic 
or Latino (64%), followed by Black or African American (9%), with Alaskan Native being the lowest (0.03%). The full demographic 
descriptive statistics are reported in the appendices (Table A2). 
The engagement data revealed a notable emphasis on games that targeted two skills: early decoding and comprehension processes, 
as indicated by higher mean values for all hours spent, variety of games played, and all attempts. However, games within these two skills 
showed a relatively high proportion of early exit rounds (22% and 23% on average, respectively) compared to 16% for games within 
phonological awareness, indicating a tendency for students to end their attempts prematurely. The games within early decoding and 
comprehension processes were frequently played by students throughout the year, evidenced by high values for days of playing (9 and 7 
days on average, respectively) and the number of levels played (10 and 8 levels on average, respectively). Of note, vocabulary games had 
lower time requirements, possibly indicating a more relatively easygoing or shorter gameplay experience. Students had least exposure 
to games in the phonological awareness skill. The full descriptive statistics of engagement data are provided in the supplementary 
materials (Table S2). 
4.2. Step 4: results of clustering algorithms 
4.2.1. Number of clusters 
The BIC curve remained relatively flat beyond nine clusters indicating nine clusters with different levels of engagement as the best 
solution (Fig. 2). We used this number of clusters across the five algorithms we compared. The principal component analysis approach 
was used to visualize the clustering results in two dimensions. Visualization of the clustering result was plotted with each point 
representing one student, grouped into different clusters (Fig. 3). 
From visual exploration (Fig. 3), we can see that the Gaussian mixture model performed less well than other methods, since the data 
points were not well separated (Panel 1). As shown in Panels 2, 3, and 4, CLARA tended to group some values at the extremes (purple 
points: Cluster 9) into one group, while the group containing these extreme values was extended to include more centre points by k- 
means (green points: Cluster 3) and PAM (pink points: Cluster 9). The results of the hierarchical clustering algorithm were the weakest; 
this method could not separate the data into distinct groups, evident from large overlaps across most of the data points in the plot 
(Panel 5). 
4.2.2. Validation indices for cluster algorithms 
The results of clustering evaluation based on internal validation for our five clustering methods are provided in Table 1. Indicators 
used to compare methods were silhouette coefficient and Dunn index, where higher values indicate a better fit, and within clusters sum 
of squares (WCSS), where lower values indicate a better solution. Cohort size and the average silhouette width for each cohort for each 
method are reported in supplementary materials (Table S3). 
Although hierarchical clustering had the highest silhouette coefficient and Dunn Index value, it was discarded due to identifying 
only one sample of adequate size (19277 = 99.85% of sample). The lack of separation between clusters was confirmed by the high 
value of WCSS. The next two best methods were k-means and PAM, with k-means outperforming PAM on two metrics: silhouette 
coefficient and WCSS (see Table 1). The Dunn index metric did not reliably distinguish between these two methods (all values between 
0.001 and 0.002 apart from hierarchical clustering). Given this comparison, k-means was found to be optimal because there was 
Table 2 
A comparison of the indicators of the time taken to succeed for games that target the four different skills.   
Q1 
Median 
Mean 
Q3 
SD 
68% lies between 
95% lies between 
Phonological awareness 
2.13 
3.86 
6.86 
8.46 
8.50 
(0, 15.36) 
(0, 23.86) 
Early decoding 
2.37 
3.47 
5.76 
6.06 
7.85 
(0, 13.61) 
(0, 21.45) 
Vocabulary 
1.39 
2.18 
3.74 
3.96 
5.66 
(0, 9.40) 
(0, 15.05) 
Comprehension processes 
2.16 
3.41 
5.47 
6.14 
6.63 
(0, 12.09) 
(0, 18.72)  
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
8
maximal within-group homogeneity with meaningful between group heterogeneity, supported by two of three internal validation 
metrics. Therefore, this solution was used for the remainder of our analysis. 
4.3. The clustering results obtained through k-means 
4.3.1. Clustering results of engagement levels 
Clustering of the six engagement variables identified nine distinct groups representing different levels of participation. Each 
engagement indicator was formed using the mean for each cluster which was then used as an input in ranking from best to worst to 
characterise these nine clusters (see appendices, Table A3). Using this approach, consistently similar rankings were observed among 
five of the six indicators: all hours spent, variety of games played, all attempts, the number of levels played and days of playing for each group. 
The exception was proportion of early exit rounds which showed the opposite ranking. Students who invested more time in a skill tended 
to play more frequently, explored a more diverse set of games, encountered more levels, and made more attempts; as a result, these 
students had a low proportion of early exists from their attempts. 
Furthermore, diverse student profiles exhibited varying levels of engagement across skills, indicating unique experiences and skill 
‘preferences’1 across users. For example, some groups showed low engagement across four skills (e.g., Cluster 4), some showed high 
engagement (e.g., Cluster 5), with others displayed clear skill ‘preferences’. In line with the overall design of the skills, individuals who 
engaged more in code-related phonological awareness games also tended to play another set of code-related games - early decoding - 
more frequently; in contrast, those who participated more in meaning-related vocabulary games also showed higher involvement in 
games targeting comprehension processes. The clusters identified students with similar game experiences, as well as identifying nine 
distinct groups with potentially diverse experiences, enabling exploration of the impact of effort invested in one skill on other skills. 
4.3.2. Step 5: initial literacy performance of the clusters 
To aid interpretation, the clusters (see Fig. 4) were ordered by the initial literacy assessment performance (DIBELS): from the 
cluster with the lowest proportion of students who were well below benchmark (Cluster 1) to the cluster with the highest proportion of 
students who performed well below benchmark (Cluster 9). The dashed lines represent the 50% and 75% thresholds for each cluster. 
The majority of students in the Clusters 1–3 performed at or above DIBELS benchmark. In Cluster 4, approximately half of the 
students met or exceeded the benchmark. From Clusters 5 to 9, approximately 75% or more of students performed below the 
benchmark level. Table 3 shows the number of participants in each cluster alongside key demographics (for more detailed social 
demographics information see supplementary materials, Table S4, and section 4.3.4.1). 
4.3.3. Step 6 & 7: visualizing engagement and performance levels of each cluster through radar charts 
After implementing the cluster algorithms, we calculated the total number of attempts and the time required for a student to master 
a specific level, excluding incomplete attempts, which indicated that a student had made an early exit from the game. 
Table 2 provides the descriptive statistics for one of the four performance indicators: time to mastery, which represents the duration 
from the first attempt to the first mastery. This indicator is a key measure across various levels within a specific game and also links 
directly the elapsed time within attempts and the number of attempts. The vocabulary games were the fastest to master, with least 
variation, whilst the phonological awareness games required the longest time and show the highest variability. The average times to 
master a level in the early decoding and comprehension processes games were comparable. 
Visualizations to illustrate the diverse outcomes of student engagement across the four skills were created from the average ranking 
of the five consistent engagement variables obtained in Step 4 (as shown in appendices, Table A3), alongside the four indicators 
evaluating performance on each skill: attempts to mastery, number of levels mastered, speed to mastery, and time to mastery. Both 
engagement and performance variables were ranked in descending order from indicators of best to worst engagement/performance, 
Fig. 2. The Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) for model-based methods (Gaussian mixture models) applied to the engagement data with 
optimal clusters. 
1 Students can’t select skills, games, or levels. Skill ‘preferences’ reflect their most engaged skill within the app. 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
9
with the highest (or best) rank displayed as closest to the centre in the charts (for more details, see supplementary materials, Table S5). 
We first discuss the analyses of the code-related skills (Fig. 5), followed by the meaning-related skills (Fig. 6). 
4.3.3.1. Code-related skills: phonological awareness and early decoding. We focus on the clusters with the largest number of participants 
Fig. 3. Visualization of five clustering results on a scatter chart (two dimensions).  
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
10
to highlight meaningful differences: Clusters 3, 4, and 7 (17.96%, 25.19%, and 20.73% of participants). These groups differed in initial 
DIBELS literacy skills, but each showed low to medium engagement in both phonological awareness and early decoding. This finding in 
line with the low rankings for number of levels mastered in phonological awareness and early decoding for these three groups. The 
discrepancy in the time and effort invested by these groups in both phonological awareness and early decoding is minimal (see 
Table S6, supplementary materials); they mastered more early decoding games than phonological awareness games. This could be 
attributed to the longer total duration spent on early decoding compared to phonological awareness. 
Critical differences among these three groups are evident when we look at the indicators of engagement together with performance 
on phonological awareness and early decoding games. Cluster 7, which had the lowest literacy levels of these three groups, was more 
Table 3 
Diverse social demographics of students in nine clusters. Social demographics were not provided for some individuals, resulting in missing data.  
Cluster (n =
cohort size, %) 
Gender 
English Language 
Learner - ELL (%) 
Special Education 
Needs - SEN (%) 
DIBELS 
Male 
(%) 
Female 
(%) 
Well Below 
Benchmark (%) 
Below 
Benchmark 
(%) 
At 
Benchmark 
(%) 
Above 
Benchmark 
(%) 
Cluster 1 n =
1726, 
8.94% 
48.96 
46.06 
10.72 
4.69 
10.6 
12.46 
40.09 
36.85 
Cluster 2 n =
571, 2.96% 
54.47 
41.86 
18.04 
6.48 
12.43 
14.54 
38.35 
34.68 
Cluster 3 n =
3468, 
17.96% 
49.28 
46.14 
15.46 
4.64 
19.12 
14.79 
37.89 
28.2 
Cluster 4 
N = 4862, 
5.19% 
46.24 
45.99 
23.51 
6.09 
34 
16.66 
30.26 
19.09 
Cluster 5 n =
248, 1.28% 
47.58 
44.35 
39.92 
10.89 
48.39 
25.4 
20.56 
5.65 
Cluster 6 
N = 1126, 
5.83% 
47.42 
44.14 
25.75 
8.53 
54.53 
20.69 
20.07 
4.71 
Cluster 7 n =
4001, 
20.73% 
43.74 
48.16 
35.99 
11.00 
58.06 
18.35 
17.92 
5.67 
Cluster 8 n =
2516, 
13.03% 
42.45 
50.48 
32.39 
10.37 
59.3 
19.36 
16.34 
5.01 
Cluster 9 n =
787, 4.08% 
49.05 
45.11 
38.37 
14.23 
68.36 
15.5 
13.34 
2.8  
Fig. 4. Proportion of children in each cluster performing at different levels of DIBELS at beginning of year.  
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
11
highly ranked on engagement in phonological awareness compared with the other two groups, yet their performance was ranked 
similarly to the other two groups (Fig. 5 & Table S7) on two metrics: (1) the average number of levels mastered per hour (Cluster 7 =
6.7, Cluster 4 = 6.9, Cluster 3 = 5.4 levels); and (2) the average time required to succeed (Cluster 7 = 7.1, Cluster 4 = 6.2, Cluster 3 =
5.6 min). Although the difference in time to mastery difference exceeds 1 min, children in Cluster 7 engaged with a larger number of 
levels suggesting that they might perceive the level to be challenging. 
Similarly, for early decoding, these three groups had comparable levels of engagement but varied in performance. Clusters 3 and 4 
had similar rankings (3rd and 4th respectively) for time and attempts required to master a level, whereas Cluster 7 was comparatively 
less proficient and ranked 7th (Fig. 5). Exploratory data analysis revealed that Cluster 7 predominantly engaged with the initial 
foundational levels of the game (see supplementary materials, Figure S8). From the radar chart, the ranking of Cluster 7 towards the 
outer edges in terms of times to mastery, attempts to mastery and speed to mastery indicates that the difficulty they faced in the early 
decoding games, resulted in needing more time than others to master even the initial levels. 
Clusters 1–4 had lower engagement with phonological awareness and early decoding games, but showed better performance in 
terms of time to mastery and attempts to mastery (Fig. 5). Conversely, Clusters 6–9 exhibited higher engagement in these two skills but 
Fig. 5. Radar Chart: Engagement and performance rankings in phonological awareness games (light blue) and early decoding games (dark blue) 
among nine clusters. 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
12
demonstrated weaker time to mastery and attempts to mastery. Regardless of group, the ranking pattern for time to mastery and attempts to 
mastery remained consistent in phonological awareness and early decoding games. 
4.3.3.2. Meaning-related skills: vocabulary and comprehension processes. For vocabulary games, Cluster 3 exhibited the highest 
participation level compared with Clusters 4 and 7 and, on average, mastered 5–6 more levels (supplementary materials, Table S7). 
The exploratory data analysis revealed that a notably higher number of students in Cluster 3 mastered over 20 levels compared to the 
other groups (supplementary materials, Figure S9). Cluster 3 performed well in the vocabulary game, achieved the highest number of 
levels mastered per hour, but their time to mastery and attempts to mastery for each level were similar to the other groups. These findings 
suggest that the proficiency level of vocabulary games had minimal impact on the time requirements for mastery. For comprehension 
processes games, Cluster 3 also demonstrated the highest level of participation. Based on the slightly higher number of levels played, 
this group required slightly more time and attempts to master each level compared to the other two groups. 
The overall engagement levels depicted in the radar charts (Fig. 6) show that Clusters 1–3 had the highest participation in vo­
cabulary and comprehension processes games, with a close ranking association between their time to mastery and attempts to mastery. In 
contrast, Clusters 7–9 had lower engagement and higher attempts to mastery, indicating these skills posed a challenge for the users in 
these groups. 
4.3.4. Step 8: validation of clustering results 
4.3.4.1. Relation to demographics and initial literacy ability. Different patterns of engagement were evident, even for clusters with 
similar literacy skills. Here we discuss the clustering results in relation to demographics and DIBELS. To aid interpretation, we consider 
pairs, triplets, or quadruplets of groups with similar initial literacy skills. Of note, the sizes of Clusters 2, 5, and 9 were relatively small 
in relation to the other clusters, Cluster 2 had a greater proportion of male students, Cluster 8 a greater proportion of female students, 
and Clusters 5–9 had greater proportions of ELL and SEN students (Table 3). 
Initial literacy performance of Clusters 1–3 was high with 66% or more at or above DIBELS benchmark; Cluster 3 was the weakest. 
Cluster 2 was a small cluster, with a greater proportion of students reported as ELL and those with SEN than Clusters 1 and 2. In relation 
to engagement and performance, Cluster 2 showed higher engagement with the meaning-related games (vocabulary and compre­
hension processes), but a greater number of attempts to master a level, Cluster 1 engaged more with these games and performed less 
well than Cluster 3. 
Fig. 5. (continued). 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
13
Cluster 4 resembled Clusters 1–3 with approximately half the group at DIBELS benchmark. Cluster 4 was the largest group, had 
balanced gender ratio, and a greater proportion of ELL students compared with Clusters 1–3. The proportion of students with reported 
SEN in Cluster 4 was similar to that of Cluster 2. Children in Cluster 4 exhibited minimal participation in any of the games studied. 
Compared with Clusters 1–3, they took longer time and needed more attempts to master a level in code-related games, but they 
outperformed Clusters 1–3 in meaning-related games. 
Clusters 5–7 exhibited similar DIBELS performance to each other with fewer than 25% of individuals achieving benchmark. In 
comparison to Clusters 1–4, Clusters 5–7 had a higher proportion of ELL students. Within this set of groups, Cluster 6 had the lowest 
proportion of students as ELL or with SEN, Cluster 5 had the highest proportion of ELL students, and Cluster 7 the highest proportion of 
students with SEN. Cluster 5 demonstrated the highest level of engagement with both code-related and meaning-related games, and 
excelled particularly in code-related games. Cluster 6 demonstrated better performance in meaning-related games compared with 
Cluster 5. 
Turning to those with the weakest initial literacy performance, Cluster 9 performed more poorly than Cluster 8. Cluster 9 had a 
slightly higher proportion of students who were at-risk of poor literacy (ELL and those with SEN) relative to Cluster 8. Cluster 8 
outperformed Cluster 9 in terms of engagement and performance, particularly in meaning-related games, but Cluster 9 had higher 
Fig. 6. Radar Chart: Engagement and performance in vocabulary games (orange) and comprehension processes games (red) among nine clusters.  
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
14
levels of participation compared with Cluster 8. 
4.3.4.2. Relation to progress on Mind the Gap. Finally, we relate the findings on engagement to general performance and learning that 
is captured by the monthly progress monitoring game - Mind the Gap (see Table 4 for gain in scores across the year, and the number of 
times this game was completed). Starting with Clusters 1–3, who had the highest proportion of students with good initial literacy 
scores, progress of students in Cluster 2 is of note: they engaged most with the app, made the most progress, but also had a higher 
proportion of students known to be at-risk of reading difficulties (ELL; students with SEN). Clusters 4 and 7 made little progress and 
showed the least engagement across the school year. Thus, engagement with Mind the Gap validates the clustering results produced by 
k-means using six indicators of engagement of skills. An exception to this pattern is evident for Clusters 8 and 9: neither made sub­
stantial positive progress, despite regular engagement. 
5. Discussion 
This innovative study provides critical information about the use and evaluation of cluster analysis to understand student 
engagement and usage with an educational literacy app in relation to learning outcomes. It provides a novel approach by integrating 
data analysis, data cleaning, methods, and validations into a holistic framework. Here we highlight key strengths of the study and focus 
Fig. 6. (continued). 
Table 4 
Mind the Gap (out-of-game assessment) results for each cohort from 2020 to 2021.  
Cluster (n = cohort size, %) 
Average of start scores (SD) 
Average of difference (progress) [end - start] (SD) 
Number of times took Mind the Gap (SD) 
Cluster 1 n = 1726, 8.94% 
8.25 (7.04) 
1.09 (8.42) 
8.05 (2.39) 
Cluster 2 n = 571, 2.96% 
7.28 (7.53) 
1.34 (8.44) 
9.22 (2.37) 
Cluster 3 n = 3468, 17.96% 
6.79 (7.14) 
0.92 (7.69) 
5.72 (2.44) 
Cluster 4 n = 4862, 25.19% 
5.61 (6.88) 
0.58 (6.14) 
2.83 (1.82) 
Cluster 5 n = 248, 1.28% 
1.92 (4.34) 
0.41 (6.86) 
9.33 (2.22) 
Cluster 6 n = 1126, 5.83% 
2.08 (4.94) 
0.59 (6.78) 
8.01 (2.39) 
Cluster 7 n = 4001, 20.73% 
2.50 (5.58) 
0.03 (6.06) 
3.78 (2.16) 
Cluster 8 n = 2516, 13.03% 
2.27 (5.33) 
0.04 (6.74) 
6.49 (2.39) 
Cluster 9 n = 787, 4.08% 
1.42 (4.78) 
−0.20 (6.25) 
8.12 (2.27)  
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
15
on contributions made to methodology, what these findings tell us about literacy development, and also limitations and suggestions for 
future work. 
5.1. Do different cluster techniques effectively discern heterogeneous groups, such as distinctive reader cohorts, within massive and 
unstructured datasets? 
All clustering methods performed well except for hierarchical clustering, and model comparison identified that the k-means al­
gorithm produced the best clustering performance. In line with previous research (Theodoridis & Koutroumbas, 2006; Yoo, Yoo, Um, & 
Yoo, 2020), k-means demonstrated sufficient dimension reduction and easily clustered high-dimensional numerical data. One crucial 
consideration in clustering analysis is the dimensionality and nature of the dataset, which will influence the similarity measures for 
different algorithms (Shirkhorshidi et al., 2015). We found that hierarchical clustering was less effective in classifying numerical data 
when compared to the partition clustering. However, other work has shown its effectiveness for the clustering of categorical data (ˇSulc 
& ˇRezankov´a, 2019). When comparing the three methods of partition clustering, partitioning around medoids and clustering large 
applications demonstrated notably faster execution times compared to k-means (see also Arora et al., 2016; Kaufman & Rousseeuw, 
1990). Overall, when considering the research questions and nature of the data, it is essential to select an appropriate clustering 
method for a given dataset. 
The use of radar charts effectively captured a wealth of information to show the association between various indicators of 
engagement and performance separately for each of the nine clusters. Examination and comparison of the size and shape of the radar 
chart for each cluster confirmed differences between reader groups that were validated by other metrics, which we discuss below. 
5.2. Literacy development 
5.2.1. Do the patterns of engagement relate to theory and previous research? 
We mapped the engagement (and also performance) data for the four skills in the radar charts, plotted separately into two pairings: 
code-related skills (phonological awareness and early decoding), and meaning-related skills (vocabulary and comprehension pro­
cesses). Separate plots were constructed for each cluster. When we examined the patterns of engagement, we found validation that our 
clustering algorithm identified coherent and meaningful groupings in relation to both theory and empirical research. Note, that these 
theoretically-informed pairings were not included into the data fed into the clustering algorithms. 
First, when we look within clusters, high engagement with phonological awareness games was found alongside high engagement 
with early decoding games. Similarly, high engagement with vocabulary games was associated with high engagement with games 
targeting comprehension processes. This pattern is in line with empirical research that has demonstrated that different skills are 
associated with word reading and text comprehension (Kendeou et al., 2008; Muter et al., 1998; Oakhill & Cain, 2012). Second, 
comparison across clusters indicated that groups who had high engagement with code-related skill games tended to show low 
engagement with meaning-related skill games, and vice versa. This is in line with a developmental shift from word reading mastery to 
listening comprehension in the determination of reading comprehension (Gough & Tunmer, 1986; Language and Reading Research 
Consortium LARRC., 2015). Third, when we consider these patterns in relation to initial reading ability, we have further validation 
that the clusters are meaningful. Students with lower initial reading ability tended to show higher engagement in basic code-related 
skills, whereas students with higher initial reading ability tend to exhibit higher engagement in meaning-related skills. 
5.2.2. Is engagement related to performance? 
Students who demonstrated moderate to high engagement levels in basic code-related skills were more likely to demonstrate lower 
to moderate performance in these specific games. Our data strongly suggest that students’ varying levels of participation can partially 
account for the variation in their progress and reading outcomes in line with Ericsson’s work on the importance of practice (1993). Our 
approach to quantifying student performance involved calculating the average time taken by each student within a group to master 
each level across the school year. A strength of this approach is that we utilized time to succeed for each student, allowing us to obtain a 
comprehensive measure of central tendency. However, a limitation is that this can be influenced by other students in the group so may 
not fully reflect individual progress during the year. Students who had greater exposure to phonological awareness and early decoding 
games, may appear slower in terms of the average values of time to mastery, but it is still possible for them to benefit from the related 
games and make progress through engagement. Students who shown greater engagement in vocabulary and comprehension processes 
games, tended to exhibit fewer attempts but required more time to master each level. This may reflect the fact that reading for meaning 
requires greater cognitive effort than word reading, due to the need to draw on both decoding and language comprehension skills. 
Most students demonstrated good engagement with the app and positive progress on the out-of-game assessment, Mind the Gap. In 
line with a growing body of research into digital educational technology and literacy (see Biancarosa & Griffiths, 2012; Diprossimo 
et al., 2023; Nizam & Law, 2021; Yang et al., 2020), our findings suggest that incorporating digital reading supplements in 
classroom-based activities offers promising opportunities for early literacy education. 
5.2.3. Is there a relation between student behaviour and demographics? 
The groups with lower literacy ability and higher engagement in the code-related skills had a higher proportion of students reported 
as ELL and SEN. This finding aligns with previous work showing that these populations often have literacy difficulties (Fitzgerald, 
1995; Melby-Lervåg & Lervåg, 2014). We note that those groups who had a high proportion of at-risk students who engaged regularly 
with the program benefited more. For example, Clusters 7 and 8 each had a high proportion of students reported as ELL or SEN (and 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
16
comparable initial low literacy levels), but Cluster 8 had higher engagement and made more progress. This suggests that engagement 
with the programme can benefit students who are at-risk of poor literacy. 
5.2.4. Does the behaviour within and between clusters relate to the programme architecture? 
As discussed, the engagement and performance levels in phonological awareness and early decoding games were similar, as were 
engagement and performance levels in games for vocabulary and comprehension processes. The basic code-related games appear at the 
same time in the range of options available, as do the meaning-related games in order to support the development in higher-level 
reading skills. These differences confirm that the underlying structure or architecture of the game is working. Students with lower 
DIBELS scores often demonstrate weaker basic code-related skills (University of Oregon, 2018). Thus, students with lower initial 
ability will be allocated to the basic skills at the start of the school year. Students with weak initial reading ability made more attempts 
and spent longer trying to master code-related reading skills, leading to higher levels of engagement with these particular skills. The 
lower levels of participation in the meaning-related skills can be attributed to these students devoting more time to developing core 
word reading skills, with less opportunity to engage in the meaning-related skills within the same academic year. We note that students 
did not play one pair of skills to the exclusion of another. This finding aligns with the understanding that reading encompasses 
interconnected and interdependent skills that should not be practised in isolation (Perfetti & Adlof, 2012). 
5.3. Strengths, limitations and future research 
Our findings demonstrate the potential to use large and complex log data to provide insights into a rich but diverse set of user’s 
profiles and behaviours, illuminating meaningful patterns in the development of early reading skills. Previous studies have not 
identified a consistent single indicator of learning processes to predict learning outcomes. We have shown that it is possible to use a 
variety (in this case 6) engagement indicators, generated by utilizing the log data, to quantify users’ behaviours, providing one way to 
capture and classify engagement in learning. Future research might usefully consider additional measures to capture what happens in 
the classrooms or at home, to determine if and how these influence engagement with digital supplements. A strength was the balanced 
proportion for reported male and female gender in our sample. The size of the cohort also allowed exploration of users with diverse 
abilities and socio-demographics. However, we note the limitation of a focus on Grade 2 students based in specific regions of the United 
States. Other work is needed to test the generalisability of our methods to different age groups, geographical regions, and digital apps 
(or similar big datasets). 
We have demonstrated that unsupervised learning methods such as clustering can identify meaningful groups with varied reading 
outcomes. By categorizing distinct reader profiles from unstructured user log files, our study offers a methodological framework that 
can be adapted to other online education platforms and other apps with online log capabilities. However, we note the limitation that 
the clustering result can be highly influenced by types of input variables (Xu & Tian, 2015). Moreover, given the speed of development 
in statistical clustering there may be other clustering methods we did not consider here, which might help us to produce new ways of 
devising cohorts. These include approaches designed to scale to large databased, including density-based clustering algorithm 
(DBSCAN) (Du et al., 1999) and a combination algorithm of partitioning around medoids and clustering large applications - clustering 
large applications based upon randomized search (CLARANS) (Ng & Han, 2002). 
Our method highlights the importance for reading development of developing a range of component skills together, a concept that 
matches other areas of learning. Therefore, the findings presented here can also feed into research around educational games testing 
logical and computation related skills in areas such as mathematics or physics facilitating further research in learning using big data 
more broadly (Outhwaite et al., 2023). Accordingly, our approach holds potential applicability in any discipline necessitating the 
combination of diverse skill sets. 
Finally, we note that we grouped the code-related and meaning-related skills and considered these separately. Research has 
demonstrated the inter-relations between the code- and meaning-related skills examined here, for example vocabulary is related to 
both word reading and listening/reading comprehension (Language and Reading Research Consortium (LARRC), 2015). A potential 
future direction of our research is to explore relationships among the skills more comprehensively. 
6. Conclusion 
This is the first study to use a large-scale and representative dataset to examine how user engagement is related to the development 
of both code-related and meaning-related reading skills in beginner readers, in a digital environment. Our findings indicate that, 
through active engagement in digital environments, children can develop both skill sets. The greater benefits associated with greater 
engagement offer insights into how to close the attainment gap amongst diverse readers through a supplementary digital reading app. 
Our approach demonstrates an effective analytic framework that we recommend other researchers apply to the big data that comes 
from the ever-increasing usage of digital reading supplements, to advance both theory and practice. Additionally, the framework under 
which the clustering results were organised by initial literacy ability is also recommended for future research to aid interpretability. 
Our data analysis, conducted independently from our industry partners, provided corroboration of both the architecture of the pro­
gramme, and the benefits of repeated practice. Finally, this paper presents evidence of an effective collaboration between researchers 
and industry, within open science principles, demonstrating the meaningful contributions that can be made through such partnerships. 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
17
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Yawen Ma: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Kate Cain: Writing – review 
& editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Anastasia Ushakova: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, 
Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. 
Data availability 
The authors do not have permission to share data. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors acknowledge the support of the Economic and Physical Research Council who funded the first author through a PhD 
studentship, and Boost Amplify for supplying the dataset for analysis. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2024.105025. 
Appendices.  
Table A.1 
The description for each created variable.  
Variables 
Description 
Engagement Variables 
All hours spent on skills 
Sum of rounds duration of playing across skills (conversion of units to hours). 
Variety of games played within 
skills 
The number of types of games are played within a specific skill. 
All attempts within skills 
Count the number of reattempting rounds for different games and sum the values within a skill for each user. 
The number of levels played within 
skills 
Count the number of different levels has been played for different games and sum the values within a skill for each user. 
Days of playing within app 
Count the number of days the user engaged in games within 4 skills. 
Proportion of early exit rounds 
Take ratio of the number of the early exits’ rounds over all attempts within skills. 
Performance Variables 
Time to mastery 
The time from the first attempt to first mastery. 
Number of levels mastered 
Sum the total number of levels mastered within skill games. 
Speed to mastery 
Represents the average number of levels a group of students can master within 1 h. Take ratio of number of levels mastered over 
all hours spent within skills. 
Attempts to mastery 
Denote the attempts needed to master a level. Take ratio of all attempts over number of levels mastered.   
Table A.2 
A summary of the social demographics of the sample (Grade 2 students). Missing records are not included.   
Well below 
benchmark 
Below 
benchmark 
At 
benchmark 
Above 
benchmark 
Total 
Sample size (%) 
7657 (39.66%) 
3260 
(16.89%) 
5206 
(26.97%) 
3182 
(16.48%) 
19305 
Number of male (M) and female (F) (%) 
M (%) 
3529 (46.09%) 
1485 
(45.55%) 
2436 
(46.79%) 
1561 
(49.06%) 
9011 
(46.68%) 
F (%) 
3450 (45.06%) 
1582 
(48.53%) 
2484 
(47.71%) 
1471 
(46.23%) 
8987 
(46.55%) 
Number of English language learner and (ELL) non- 
English language learner (non-ELL) (%) 
ELL (%) 
2762 (36.07%) 
944 (28.96%) 
920 
(17.67%) 
287 (9.02%) 
4913 
(25.45%) 
non-ELL 
(%) 
3695 (48.26%) 
1931 
(59.20%) 
3717 
(71.40%) 
2635 
(82.81%) 
11978 
(62.05%) 
Number of special education needs (SEN) and non- 
special education needs (non-SEN) (%) 
SEN (%) 
852 (11.13%) 
246 (7.55%) 
295 (5.67%) 
118 (3.71%) 
1511 
(7.83%) 
non-SEN 
(%) 
5685 (74.25%) 
2657 
(81.50%) 
4379 
(84.11%) 
2833 
(89.03%) 
15554 
(80.57%) 
Proportion of races (%) 
American Indian (AI) 
Alaskan Native (AN) 
Asian (AS) 
Black or African American (B) 
AI (%) 
14 (0.18%) 
2 (0.06%) 
7 (0.13%) 
7 (0.22%) 
30 (0.16%) 
AN (%) 
2 (0.03%) 
0 (0%) 
2 (0.04%) 
1 (0.03%) 
5 (0.03%) 
AS (%) 
127 (1.66%) 
88 (2.70%) 
212 (4.07%) 
219 (6.88%) 
646 (3.35%) 
B (%) 
824 (10.76%) 
283 (8.68%) 
437 (8.39%) 
252 (7.92%) 
1796 
(9.30%) 
(continued on next page) 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
18
Table A.2 (continued)  
Well below 
benchmark 
Below 
benchmark 
At 
benchmark 
Above 
benchmark 
Total 
Hispanic or Latino (H) 
Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander (NHPI) 
Multiracial/other (M) 
White (W) 
Not Specified (NS)  
H (%) 
4962 (64.80%) 
2192 
(67.24%) 
3392 
(65.16%) 
1885 
(59.24%) 
12431 
(64.39%) 
NHPI (%) 
48 (0.63%) 
46 (1.41%) 
133 (2.55%) 
160 (5.03%) 
387 (2.00%) 
M (%) 
128 (1.67%) 
44 (1.35%) 
43 (0.83%) 
25 (0.79%) 
240 (1.24%) 
W (%) 
553 (7.22%) 
269 (8.25%) 
456 (8.76%) 
375 (11.79%) 
1653 
(8.56%) 
NS (%) 
8 (0.10%) 
2 (0.06%) 
4 (0.08%) 
4 (0.13%) 
18 (0.09%)   
Table A.3 
Clustering results of the ranking of engagement for each cluster across four skills (k-means).  
Skills 
Ranking of 
all hours 
spent (v1) 
Ranking of 
variety of 
games played 
(v2) 
Ranking of 
all attempts 
(v3) 
Ranking of 
number of 
levels played 
(v4) 
Ranking of 
days of 
playing (v5) 
Ranking of 
proportion of 
early exit rounds 
(v6) 
Engagement ranking in 
radar charts (see Figs. 5 
and 6) (average ranking of 
v1-v5) 
Cluster 1 
Phonological 
awareness 
7 
8 
7 
7 
7 
3 
7 
Early decoding 
8 
8 
7 
7 
7 
2 
7 
Vocabulary 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
7 
3 
Comprehension 
processes 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
7 
3 
Cluster 2 
Phonological 
awareness 
5 
2 
4 
4 
4 
5 
4 
Early decoding 
5 
5 
5 
4 
5 
4 
5 
Vocabulary 
1 
1 
2 
1 
2 
9 
1 
Comprehension 
processes 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
1 
Cluster 3 
Phonological 
awareness 
8 
9 
8 
8 
8 
2 
8 
Early decoding 
7 
7 
6 
6 
6 
3 
6 
Vocabulary 
6 
5 
6 
5 
6 
4 
6 
Comprehension 
processes 
6 
5 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
Cluster 4 
Phonological 
awareness 
9 
7 
9 
9 
9 
1 
9 
Early decoding 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
1 
9 
Vocabulary 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
2 
8 
Comprehension 
processes 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
1 
9 
Cluster 5 
Phonological 
awareness 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
9 
2 
Early decoding 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
9 
1 
Vocabulary 
2 
2 
1 
2 
1 
8 
2 
Comprehension 
processes 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
9 
2 
Cluster 6 
Phonological 
awareness 
4 
6 
5 
6 
6 
4 
6 
Early decoding 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
6 
3 
Vocabulary 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
6 
4 
Comprehension 
processes 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
5 
4 
Cluster 7 
Phonological 
awareness 
6 
5 
6 
5 
5 
6 
5 
Early decoding 
6 
6 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
Vocabulary 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
1 
9 
Comprehension 
processes 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
2 
8 
Cluster 8 
Phonological 
awareness 
3 
4 
3 
3 
3 
7 
3 
Early decoding 
4 
4 
4 
5 
4 
5 
4 
(continued on next page) 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
19
Table A.3 (continued) 
Skills 
Ranking of 
all hours 
spent (v1) 
Ranking of 
variety of 
games played 
(v2) 
Ranking of 
all attempts 
(v3) 
Ranking of 
number of 
levels played 
(v4) 
Ranking of 
days of 
playing (v5) 
Ranking of 
proportion of 
early exit rounds 
(v6) 
Engagement ranking in 
radar charts (see Figs. 5 
and 6) (average ranking of 
v1-v5) 
Vocabulary 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
3 
7 
Comprehension 
processes 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
3 
7 
Cluster 9 
Phonological 
awareness 
1 
3 
1 
2 
1 
8 
1 
Early decoding 
2 
3 
2 
3 
2 
7 
2 
Vocabulary 
5 
6 
5 
6 
5 
5 
5 
Comprehension 
processes 
5 
6 
5 
5 
5 
4 
5  
References 
Adams, M. J. (1990). Beginning to read: Thinking and learning about print. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.  
Agudo-Peregrina, ´A. F., Iglesias-Pradas, S., Conde-Gonz´alez, M.´A., & Hern´andez-García, ´A. (2014). Can we predict success from log data in VLEs? Classification of 
interactions for learning analytics and their relation with performance in VLE-supported F2F and online learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 31(1), 542–550. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.05.031 
Anderson, R. C., & Freebody, P. (1981). Vocabulary knowledge. In J. T. Guthrie (Ed.), Comprehension and teaching: Research reviews (pp. 77–117). Newark, Delaware: 
International Reading Association.  
Arora, P., Virmani, D., & Varshney, S. (2016). Analysis of k-means and k-medoids algorithm for big data. Procedia Computer Science, 78, 507–512. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/J.PROCS.2016.02.095 
Baker, R. S. J. D., Corbett, A. T., & Aleven, V. (2008). More accurate student modeling through contextual estimation of slip and guess probabilities in bayesian 
knowledge tracing. Paper presentation at the conference of the 9th Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 406–415. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-69132-7_44. Montreal, 
Canada. 
Baker, R. S., Corbett, A. T., & Koedinger, K. R. (2004). Detecting student misuse of intelligent tutoring systems. August/September. In Paper presentation at the 
conference of the 7th intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 531–540). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-30139-4_50. Montreal, Canada. 
Banfield, J. D., & Raftery, A. E. (1993). Model-based Gaussian and non-Gaussian clustering. Biometrics, 49(3), 803. https://doi.org/10.2307/2532201 
Benton, L., Joye, N., Sumner, E., Gauthier, A., Ibrahim, S., & Vasalou, A. (2023). Exploring how children with reading difficulties respond to instructional supports in 
literacy games and the role of prior knowledge. British Journal of Educational Technology, 54(5), 1314–1331. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13318 
Biancarosa, G., & Griffiths, G. G. (2012). Technology tools to support reading in the digital age. The Future of Children, 22(2), 139–160. https://doi.org/10.1353/ 
foc.2012.0014 
Bozdogan, H. (1987). Model selection and Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC): The general theory and its analytical extensions. Psychometrika, 52(3), 345–370. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02294361 
Ciampa, K. (2012). ICANREAD: The effects of an online reading program on Grade 1 students’ engagement and comprehension strategy use. Journal of Research on 
Technology in Education, 45(1), 27–59. https://doi.org/10.1080/15391523.2012.10782596 
de Brey, C., Musu, L., McFarland, J., Wilkinson-Flicker, S., Diliberti, M., Zhang, A., Branstetter, C., & Wang, X. (2019). Status and trends in the education of racial and 
ethnic groups 2018 (NCES 2019-038). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics. Retrieved from https://nces.ed. 
gov/pubs2019/2019038.pdf. (Accessed 9 September 2023). 
Department for Education. (2019). National curriculum assessments: Key stage 2, 2019 (revised). Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/ 
national-curriculum-assessments-key-stage-2-2019-revised. (Accessed 6 September 2023). 
Diprossimo, L., Ushakova, A., Zoski, J., Gamble, H., Irey, R., & Cain, K. (2023). The associations between child and item characteristics, use of vocabulary scaffolds, 
and reading comprehension in a digital environment: Insights from a big data approach. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 73, Article 102165. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.CEDPSYCH.2023.102165 
Du, Q., Faber, V., & Gunzburger, M. (1999). Centroidal voronoi tessellations: Applications and algorithms. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Review, 41(4), 
637–676. https://doi.org/10.1137/S0036144599352836 
Du, X., Yang, J., Shelton, B. E., Hung, J.-L., & Zhang, M. (2021). A systematic meta-review and analysis of learning analytics research. Behaviour & Information 
Technology, 40(1), 49–62. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2019.1669712 
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-R¨omer, C. (1993). The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100(3), 
363–406. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.100.3.363 
Fitzgerald, J. (1995). English-as-a-second-language learners’ cognitive reading processes: A review of research in the United States. Review of Educational Research, 65 
(2), 145–190. https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543065002145 
Fraley, C., & Raftery, A. E. (1998). How many clusters? Which clustering method? Answers via model-based cluster analysis. Computer Journal, 41(8), 586–588. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/41.8.578 
Fraley, C., & Raftery, A. E. (2006). MCLUST version 3: an R package for normal mixture modeling and model-based clustering. Retrieved from https://apps.dtic.mil/ 
sti/pdfs/ADA456562.pdf. (Accessed 3 January 2023). 
G´omez-Aguilar, D. A., Hern´andez-García, ´A., García-Pe˜nalvo, F. J., & Ther´on, R. (2015). Tap into visual analysis of customization of grouping of activities in 
eLearning. Computers in Human Behavior, 47, 60–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.11.001 
Goswami, U., & Bryant, P. (1990). Phonological skills and learning to read (1st ed.). London: Psychology Press.  
Gough, P. B., & Tunmer, W. E. (1986). Decoding, reading and reading disability. Remedial and Special Education, 7(1), 6–10. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
074193258600700104 
Guterres, A. (2020). The future of education is here. United Nations. Retrieved from https://www.un.org/en/coronavirus/future-education-here. (Accessed 29 
September 2023). 
Halkidi, M., Vazirgiannis, M., & Hennig, C. (2015). Method-independent indices for cluster validation and estimating the number of clusters. In C. Hennig, M. Meila, 
F. Murtagh, & R. Rocci (Eds.), Handbook of cluster analysis (pp. 616–639). New York: Chapman and Hall/CRC. https://doi.org/10.1201/b19706.  
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, J. (2009). The elements of statistical learning: Data mining, inference, and prediction (2nd ed.). New York: Springer. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7 
Hennig, C. (2023). Package ‘fpc’. Retrieved from https://cran.r-project.org/package=fpc. (Accessed 2 May 2023). 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
20
Henrie, C. R., Halverson, L. R., & Graham, C. R. (2015). Measuring student engagement in technology-mediated learning: A review. Computers & Education, 90, 36–53. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPEDU.2015.09.005 
Hofmann, V. (2021). App-based learning in phonological awareness and word-reading comprehension and its specific benefits for lower achieving students. 
Internationals, 2, Article 100066. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedro.2021.100066 
Hoover, W. A., & Gough, P. B. (1990). The simple view of reading. Reading and Writing, 2(2), 127–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00401799 
Howard, S. K., Yang, J., Ma, J., Maton, K., & Rennie, E. (2018). App clusters: Exploring patterns of multiple app use in primary learning contexts. Computers & 
Education, 127, 154–164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.08.021 
Isbister, K., & Schaffer, N. (2008). Game usability: Advice from the experts for advancing the player experience (1st ed.). Boca Raton: CRC Press. https://doi.org/10.1201/ 
b14580 
Kassambara, A., & Mundt, F. (2016). Package ‘factoextra’. Retrieved from https://piyanit.nl/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/factoextra.pdf. (Accessed 6 January 2023). 
Kaufman, L., & Rousseeuw, P. J. (1990). Partitioning around medoids (program PAM). In L. Kaufman, & P. J. Rousseeuw (Eds.), Finding groups in data: An introduction 
to cluster analysis (pp. 68–125). Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons Inc. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470316801.ch2.  
Kendeou, P., Bohn-Gettler, C., White, M. J., & Van Den Broek, P. (2008). Children’s inference generation across different media. Journal of Research in Reading, 31(3), 
259–272. https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1467-9817.2008.00370.X 
Kuh, G. D. (2009). The national survey of student engagement: Conceptual and empirical foundations. New Directions for Institutional Research, 2009(141), 5–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/IR.283 
Kvapil, L. A., Kimpel, M. W., Jayasekare, R. R., & Shelton, K. (2022). Using Gaussian mixture model clustering to explore morphology and standardized production of 
ceramic vessels: A case study of pottery from late bronze age Greece. Journal of Archaeological Science: Report, 45, Article 103543. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
JASREP.2022.103543 
Language and Reading Research Consortium (LARRC).. (2015). Learning to read: Should we keep things simple? Reading Research Quarterly, 50(2), 151–169. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/rrq.99 
Language and Reading Research Consortium (LARRC) & Logan, J. (2017). Pressure points in reading comprehension: A quantile multiple regression analysis. Journal 
of Educational Psychology, 109(4), 451–464. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000150 
Laufer, B., & Hulstijn, J. (2001). Incidental vocabulary acquisition in a second language: The construct of task-induced involvement. Applied Linguistics, 22(1), 1–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/APPLIN/22.1.1 
Lepper, M. R., Corpus, J. H., & Iyengar, S. S. (2005). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orientations in the classroom: Age differences and academic correlates. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2), 184–196. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.97.2.184 
Liang, D., Jia, J., Wu, X., Miao, J., & Wang, A. (2014). Analysis of learners’ behaviors and learning outcomes in a massive open online course. Knowledge Management 
& E-Learning: International Journal, 6(3), 281–298. https://doi.org/10.34105/J.KMEL.2014.06.019 
Liao, C. H., & Wu, J. Y. (2023). Learning analytics on video-viewing engagement in a flipped statistics course: Relating external video-viewing patterns to internal 
motivational dynamics and performance. Computers & Education, 197, Article 104754. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPEDU.2023.104754 
Lim, H., Kim, S., Chung, K. M., Lee, K., Kim, T., & Heo, J. (2022). Is college students’ trajectory associated with academic performance? Computers & Education, 178, 
Article 104397. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPEDU.2021.104397 
Locher, F., & Pfost, M. (2020). The relation between time spent reading and reading comprehension throughout the life course. Journal of Research in Reading, 43(1), 
57–77. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9817.12289 
L´opez-Escribano, C., Valverde-Montesino, S., & García-Ortega, V. (2021). The impact of e-book reading on young children’s emergent literacy skills: An analytical 
review. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(12), 6510. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18126510 
MacQueen, J. (1967). Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate. In Paper presentation at the proceedings of the 5th berkeley symposium on mathematical 
statistics and probability (Vol. 1, pp. 281–297). Oakland, CA, USA http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.bsmsp/1200512992. 
Melby-Lervåg, M., & Lervåg, A. (2014). Reading comprehension and its underlying components in second-language learners: A meta-analysis of studies comparing 
first- and second-language learners. Psychological Bulletin, 140(2), 409–433. https://doi.org/10.1037/A0033890 
Milligan, G. W., & Cooper, M. C. (1988). A study of standardization of variables in cluster analysis. Journal of Classification, 5(2), 181–204. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF01897163 
Moubayed, A., Injadat, M., Shami, A., & Lutfiyya, H. (2020). Student engagement level in an e-Learning environment: Clustering using k-means. American Journal of 
Distance Education, 34(2), 137–156. https://doi.org/10.1080/08923647.2020.1696140 
Muter, V., Hulme, C., Snowling, M., & Taylor, S. (1998). Segmentation, not rhyming, predicts early progress in learning to read. Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 71(1), 3–27. https://doi.org/10.1006/JECP.1998.2453 
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, & Council of Chief State School Officers. (2010). Common core state standards (English language arts 
standards). Retrieved from http://corestandards.org/. (Accessed 9 September 2023). 
National Reading Panel (US). (2000). Teaching children to read: An evidence-based assessment of the scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading 
instruction. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health. Retrieved from https://www.nichd.nih.gov/sites/default/ 
files/publications/pubs/nrp/Documents/report.pdf. (Accessed 6 June 2023). 
Newton, S., Gamble, H., Su, Y., Zoski, J., & Damico, D. (2019). Examining the Impact of amplify Reading on student Literacy in grades K-2. 2019 report (ED604917). ERIC. 
Retrieved from https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED604917.pdf. (Accessed 9 December 2022). 
Ng, R. T., & Han, J. (2002). Clarans: A method for clustering objects for spatial data mining. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 14(5), 1003–1016. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2002.1033770 
Nizam, D. N. M., & Law, E. L. C. (2021). Derivation of young children’s interaction strategies with digital educational games from gaze sequences analysis. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 146, Article 102558. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102558 
Oakhill, J. V., & Cain, K. (2012). The precursors of reading ability in young readers: Evidence from a four-year longitudinal study. Scientific Studies of Reading, 16(2), 
91–121. https://doi.org/10.1080/10888438.2010.529219 
Outhwaite, L. A., Early, E., Herodotou, C., & Van Herwegen, J. (2023). Understanding how educational maths apps can enhance learning: A content analysis and 
qualitative comparative analysis. British Educational Research Association Journal, 54(5), 1292–1313. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13339 
Park, H. S., & Jun, C. H. (2009). A simple and fast algorithm for k-medoids clustering. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(2), 3336–3341. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ESWA.2008.01.039 
Perfetti, C., & Adlof, S. M. (2012). Reading comprehension: A conceptual framework from word meaning to text meaning. In J. Sabatini, E. Albro, & T. O’Reilly (Eds.), 
Measuring up: Advances in how we assess reading ability (pp. 3–20). Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Education.  
Perfetti, C. A., Landi, N., & Oakhill, J. (2005). The acquisition of reading comprehension skill. In M. J. Snowling, & C. Hulme (Eds.), The science of reading: A handbook 
(pp. 227–247). Oxford: Blackwell. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470757642.CH13.  
R Core Team. (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved from http://www.r-project.org/index. 
html. (Accessed 3 September 2022). 
S´anchez, J. L. G., Vela, F. L. G., Simarro, F. M., & Padilla-Zea, N. (2012). Playability: Analysing user experience in video games. Behaviour & Information Technology, 31 
(10), 1033–1054. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2012.710648 
Saqr, M., & L´opez-Pernas, S. (2021). The longitudinal trajectories of online engagement over a full program. Computers & Education, 175, Article 104325. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.COMPEDU.2021.104325 
Schlechty, P. C. (2001). Shaking up the school house: How to support and sustain educational innovation. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Inc.  
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model. Annals of Statistics, 6(2), 461–464. https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1176344136 
Shirkhorshidi, A. S., Aghabozorgi, S., & Ying Wah, T. (2015). A comparison study on similarity and dissimilarity measures in clustering continuous data. PLoS One, 10 
(12), Article e0144059. https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0144059 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Computers & Education 214 (2024) 105025
21
Sinatra, G. M., Heddy, B. C., & Lombardi, D. (2015). The challenges of defining and measuring student engagement in science. Educational Psychologist, 50(1), 1–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2014.1002924 
Snow, C. E., Burns, M. S., & Grifin, P. (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young children. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/ 
10.17226/6023 
Sparks, R. L., Patton, J., & Ganschow, L. (2012). Profiles of more and less successful L2 learners: A cluster analysis study. Learning and Individual Differences, 22(4), 
463–472. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.LINDIF.2012.03.009 
ˇSulc, Z., & ˇRezankov´a, H. (2019). Comparison of similarity measures for categorical data in hierarchical clustering. Journal of Classification, 36(1), 58–72. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00357-019-09317-5 
The No Child Left. (2002). Behind Act of 2001. In For no child left behind act: The No child Left behind act’s reading first intiative. Public Law No. 107-110, 115 stat. 1425. 
Retrieved from https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-107publ110/pdf/PLAW-107publ110.pdf. (Accessed 5 May 2023). 
Theodoridis, S., & Koutroumbas, K. (2006). Pattern recognition (3rd ed.). Elsevier Science & Technology. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-369531-4.X5000-8 
University of Oregon. (2018). Center on teaching and learning. In 8th edition of dynamic indicators of basic early literacy skills (DIBELS). Eugene, Oregon: University of 
Oregon. https://dibels.uoregon.edu.  
Vardal, O., Bonometti, V., Drachen, A., Wade, A., & Stafford, T. (2022). Mind the gap: Distributed practice enhances performance in a MOBA game. PLoS One, 17(10), 
Article e0275843. https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0275843 
Verhoeven, L., van Leeuwe, J., & Vermeer, A. (2011). Vocabulary growth and reading development across the elementary school years. Scientific Studies of Reading, 15 
(1), 8–25. https://doi.org/10.1080/10888438.2011.536125 
Vnucko, G., & Klimova, B. (2023). Exploring the potential of digital game-based vocabulary learning: A systematic review. Systems, 11(2), 57. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/systems11020057 
Wang, X., Liu, Q., Pang, H., Tan, S. C., Lei, J., Wallace, M. P., & Li, L. (2023). What matters in AI-supported learning: A study of human-AI interactions in language 
learning using cluster analysis and epistemic network analysis. Computers & Education, 194, Article 104703. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPEDU.2022.104703 
Wickham, H., Averick, M., Bryan, J., Chang, W., McGowan, L. D, François, R., , … Spinu, V., et al. (2019). Welcome to the tidyverse. Journal of Open Source Software, 4 
(43), 1686. https://doi.org/10.21105/JOSS.01686 
Wickham, H., François, R., Henry, L., & Müller, K. (2019). Package ‘dplyr’. Retrieved from https://cran.r-hub.io/web/packages/dplyr/dplyr.pdf. (Accessed 3 January 
2023). 
Woolfolk, A. (2007). Educational psychology (10th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.  
Wyse, D., Jones, R., Bradford, H., & Wolpert, M. A. (2013). Teaching English, language and literacy (3rd ed.). London: Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/ 
9780203073520 
Xu, D., & Tian, Y. (2015). A comprehensive survey of clustering algorithms. Annals of Data Science, 2, 165–193. https://doi.org/10.1007/S40745-015-0040-1 
Yang, D., Zargar, E., Adams, A. M., Day, S. L., & Connor, C. M. D. (2020). Using interactive e-book user log variables to track reading processes and predict digital 
learning outcomes. Assessment for Effective Intervention, 46(4), 292–303. https://doi.org/10.1177/1534508420941935 
Yoo, C., Yoo, Y., Um, H. Y., & Yoo, J. K. (2020). On hierarchical clustering in sufficient dimension reduction. Communications for Statistical Applications and Methods, 27 
(4), 431–443. https://doi.org/10.29220/CSAM.2020.27.4.431 
Zheng, B., Lin, C. H., & Kwon, J. B. (2020). The impact of learner-, instructor-, and course-level factors on online learning. Computers & Education, 150, Article 103851. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPEDU.2020.103851 
Y. Ma et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             


