# 7. 연구논문_Elevating theoretical insight and predictive accuracy in business research Combining PLS-SEM and selected machine learning algorithms

---
**Source:** [[7. 연구논문_Elevating theoretical insight and predictive accuracy in business research Combining PLS-SEM and selected machine learning algorithms.pdf]]
**Category:** #mba #ai
**Imported:** 2026-03-05

Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
Available online 27 December 2023
0148-2963/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Elevating theoretical insight and predictive accuracy in business research: 
Combining PLS-SEM and selected machine learning algorithms 
Nicole Franziska Richter a,*, Ana Alina Tudoran b 
a University of Southern Denmark, Denmark 
b Aarhus University, Denmark   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Partial least squares-structural equation 
modeling (PLS-SEM) 
Machine learning (ML) 
Prediction 
Method triangulation 
Unified theory of acceptance and use of 
technology (UTAUT) 
A B S T R A C T   
We propose a routine for combining partial least squares-structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) with selected 
machine learning (ML) algorithms to exploit the two method’s causal-predictive and causal-exploratory capa­
bilities. Triangulating these two methods can improve the predictive accuracy of research models, enhance the 
understanding of relationships, assist in identifying new relationships and therewith contribute to theorizing. We 
demonstrate the advantages and challenges of triangulating the two methods on an illustrative example along a 
four-step-routine: (1) Develop a PLS-SEM on a baseline conceptual model and use its standards to assess mea­
surement model quality and generate latent variables scores. (2) Apply specific ML algorithms on the extracted 
data to validate relationships and identify new (linear) relationships that may go beyond the initial hypotheses; 
similarly, assess model advancements in the form of nonlinearities and interaction effects. (3) Evaluate the 
theoretical plausibility of alternative models. (4) Integrate alternative models in PLS-SEM and compare these 
with the baseline model using a recently proposed prediction-oriented test procedure in PLS-SEM.   
1. Introduction 
Partial least squares-structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) was 
developed as a causal-predictive research method designed to explain 
the relationships between theoretical or latent constructs, and to facil­
itate predictive analysis (J¨oreskog & Wold, 1982), which has received 
growing scholarly attention (e.g., Richter et al., 2016a; Richter et al., 
2016b; Sarstedt et al., 2022a). Researchers using PLS-SEM can estimate 
models based on conceptual ideas and have a rich portfolio of validated 
metrics, decision-trees and checklists at hand to evaluate their explan­
atory power and accuracy (e.g., Guenther et al., 2023; Hair et al., 2022; 
Ringle et al., 2023; Sharma et al., 2023). These routines enable a 
comprehensive comparison of alternative conceptual models. Such 
comparison has relevance for many research and decision-making situ­
ations that involve alternative or weak theories for understanding a 
phenomenon, potentially complex associations between input factors 
predicting or causing an outcome, and/ or different contextual de­
pendencies (e.g., Richter et al., 2022). PLS-SEM requires researchers’ 
active conceptualization and modeling skills to test alternative models 
that reflect different ideas, complexities, or contexts. This inherently 
entails a subjective selection process, in which the researcher’s 
perspective and assumptions influence choices. 
We argue that this process can be supported by the causal-discovery 
capabilities of machine learning (ML) algorithms that employ systematic 
procedures to identify the most likely model based on statistical criteria 
and metrics. With the emergence of big data (e.g., e-commerce data in 
marketing; Hair & Sarstedt, 2021), ML algorithms, such as Artificial 
Neural Networks (ANN) and Bayesian Networks (BN), have gained 
popularity for various purposes (e.g., Boto Ferreira et al., 2021; Canhoto, 
2021; Garbe & Richter, 2009; Sachan et al., 2020; S´anchez-Franco et al., 
2019; Tudoran, 2022). BN notably, facilitate the construction of trans­
parent predictive models by discovering data patterns, aiding in the 
identification of new relationships, and facilitating the integration of a 
priori information to enable theory testing. BN can valuably comple­
ment PLS-SEM to generate new hypotheses and insights or simply to test 
the robustness of findings (Bollen & Pearl, 2013; Druzdzel & Simon, 
1993; Pearl, 2012a; Pearl, 2012b), which has become a requirement in 
some guidelines on using PLS-SEM (e.g., Sarstedt et al., 2019). 
Combining SEM and different ML algorithms has become prominent in 
fields such as medical or health research, where authors frequently 
integrate insights from data-driven models into conceptual models (e.g., 
Kenett et al., 2022; Liew et al., 2023). For example, Liew et al. (2023) 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: nicole@sam.sdu.dk (N.F. Richter), anat@econ.au.dk (A.A. Tudoran).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Business Research 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jbusres 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2023.114453 
Received 6 February 2023; Received in revised form 22 November 2023; Accepted 6 December 2023   


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
2
provide new insight regarding the relationships between poor sleep, 
psychological factors, and the duration of pain, which influence dis­
abilities. However, in business research, the combination of the two 
approaches is still rare, driven only by a select group of authors. In the 
Journal of Business Research, which is a leading outlet publishing PLS- 
SEM studies (e.g., Cho et al., 2022b; Sarstedt et al., 2022a; Sarstedt et al., 
2022b), only two percent of the studies using PLS-SEM employ ML al­
gorithms in their analyses. In the business domain, authors mainly 
benefit from ML capabilities to validate their PLS-SEM findings and to 
identify non-linear associations in their models post PLS-SEM (e.g., 
Leong et al., 2020; Ray et al., 2021). In addition to these possibilities, 
researchers can also benefit from identifying new structural relation­
ships in the data using ML algorithms. This approach can further facil­
itate understanding of influencing factors in business relations, for 
instance, determining which factors are associated with customer 
retention, technology adoption, or the performance in multicultural 
teams, doing so in ways that existing theoretical models cannot (e.g., 
Gupta & Kim, 2008). 
PLS-SEM and ML share some common ground regarding prediction- 
related capabilities and metrics, although they follow different philos­
ophies and serve distinct use cases. In prediction, we forecast an output 
value for new or future observations given relevant input values that are 
or might be associated with a model’s output. To assess the model’s 
accuracy, we assess how well it predicts (output) data that was not used 
to estimate or optimize the model (Shmueli, 2010; Shmueli & Koppius, 
2011). In PLS-SEM, we build models that combine latent constructs and 
indicators (or observable variables) and use them in (simultaneously) 
testing theories and making predictions. The predictions can refer to the 
indicators, that is, to predict the endogenous constructs’ indicator scores 
(see Shmueli et al., 2016), or to constructs, that is, to predict the 
endogenous constructs’ construct scores (see Danks et al., 2017). In PLS- 
SEM the algorithms and evaluation routines are standardized, which 
facilitates the interpretation of the results and enables a comparison and 
selection of SEM modeled by the researcher. 
ML uses a diverse range of algorithms to achieve highly accurate 
predictions. Many of these algorithms are “black boxes” due to their 
limited transparency in revealing the relationships between (indicator 
or construct) variables, but not all ML algorithms share this character­
istic. Constraint-based algorithms for learning BN allow researchers to 
identify previously unanticipated relationships that were not actively 
conceptualized beforehand in pre-specified models. These algorithms 
introduce a framework of causal reasoning into ML that enables the 
investigation of causal relationships in the data (e.g., Druzdzel & Simon, 
1993). Through its data-driven causal discovery approach, BN can 
contribute to uncovering new relationships and refining existing models. 
These capabilities align well with PLS-SEM’s causal-predictive 
strengths. Combining BN’s potential to discover new causal relation­
ships and PLS-SEM’s capacity for transparent causal-predictive 
modeling enables a comprehensive approach that facilitates trans­
parency, model evaluation, comparison, and informed selection of the 
most appropriate models from competing alternatives (see Fig. 1). 
While researchers call for more combination of methods, such as 
triangulation or ensembling, to deepen the insights gained through 
research (Bruno et al., 2022; Burton & Obel, 2011; Nielsen et al., 2020; 
Richter et al., 2022), there is limited knowledge transfer between re­
searchers using PLS-SEM and ML algorithms. We facilitate this knowl­
edge exchange and contend that substantial value can be obtained 
mutually through integrating the strengths inherent in both methodol­
ogies. We discuss how specific ML algorithms can complement PLS-SEM 
and how the two methods can jointly enhance theory and research. This 
study emphasizes the structural prediction of endogenous constructs for 
which we propose a routine that complements past approaches. Through 
an illustrative example, we demonstrate the benefits of this combined 
use. Ultimately, our study will enable PLS-SEM researchers to integrate 
specific ML algorithms (BN for causal discovery, and Multivariate 
Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) and Generalized Additive Models 
(GAM) algorithms that assist in identifying non-linearities) as new tools 
in their applications. Thus, the study can trigger further contributions to 
the theoretical and conceptual ideas in the business literature. 
2. Approaches to combining PLS-SEM and ML algorithms 
2.1. Literature review 
To identify previous approaches combining PLS-SEM and ML algo­
rithms in business research, we searched the Web of Science and Scopus 
databases using a set of keywords1 and filtered results for business and 
management outlets between 2016 and today. Having removed dupli­
cates and studies that, upon closer inspection, did not match our search 
criteria we worked with 37 studies (see Table 1). These studies 
employed ML either prior to (in 6 studies) or after (in 30 studies) 
applying PLS-SEM. One study, Sener et al. (2019), was assigned to both 
categories. These authors used the universal structural modeling 
approach that Buckler and Hennig-Thurau (2008) proposed. Sener 
et al.’s (2019) aim was to reveal previously unknown relationships be­
tween constructs (akin to studies characterized as pre-PLS-SEM) and 
non-linear dynamics (akin to studies categorized as post-PLS-SEM) 
through an iterative process using different techniques such as principal 
component analysis (PCA), ANN, and the conventional PLS-SEM. 
The majority of the identified studies used ML algorithms (e.g., ANN) 
after applying PLS-SEM, mostly to identify non-linearities or to validate 
their PLS-SEM findings (e.g., Leong et al., 2020, Lo et al., 2022; Ray 
et al., 2021). Typically, the studies refer to this method as a hybrid SEM- 
ANN approach: First, the hypothesized relationships are tested using 
PLS-SEM, including the standard model evaluation procedures (e.g., 
Hair et al., 2019). Second, the exogenous constructs (either all, or only 
those that show significant relationships to the endogenous construct(s)) 
are used as input for a subsequent ANN approach. Finally, a sensitivity 
analysis is used to evaluate the contribution each exogenous construct 
makes in developing the outcome. Using this procedure, Leong et al. 
(2020), for instance, identified previously overlooked non-linear asso­
ciations in consumer decision making processes in social commerce, and 
Lo et al. (2022) compared the normalized relative importance found in 
the ANN results to the path coefficients produced by PLS-SEM in con­
sumers’ impulsive buying in livestreaming commerce. Only a few 
studies in business-related research used ML approaches to aid the 
development of structural models or to explore the relationships be­
tween constructs, before applying PLS-SEM. For instance, Mandhani 
et al. (2020) used a BN represented in a graphical structure to build an 
exploratory model based on what they learnt from the data. The authors 
applied the BN to factors obtained from a PCA. They integrated 16 al­
gorithms and analyzed the most robust structure following various 
criteria.2 This structure was then used in the subsequent PLS-SEM 
analysis. 
Notably, most of the above studies were driven by the same set of 
authors in the field. For instance, all three studies that present a BN 
before PLS-SEM involve Jyoti Mandhani as a co-author (e.g., Mandhani 
et al., 2020); similarly, in the studies that use ML post-PLS-SEM, Keng- 
Boon Ooi is a co-author 13 times (e.g., Leong et al., 2020; Ooi et al., 
2018). We noted additionally that only two of the reviewed studies (Lo 
et al., 2022; Sanchez-Franco et al., 2019) used the PLSpredict routine or 
its ideas to validate their PLS-SEM’s predictive power. 
Our approach drew inspiration from these studies, and the discussion 
of causality in BN (e.g., Druzdzel & Simon, 1993). It also shows simi­
larity to studies in information and expert systems, transportation, and 
1 Keywords included combinations of PLS-SEM, ML, BN, ANN, in singular and 
plural format using both abbreviations and the full wording.  
2 Criteria such as, arc strength and occurrence proportion of arcs from 
bootstrapping. The structure obtained from the Hill-Climbing algorithm with 
reference to the AIC metric turned out to be the most robust. 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
3
the life-science literature that combine SEM and BN techniques to 
investigate new relationships (e.g., Carvalho et al., 2021; Díez-Mesa 
et al., 2018; Gupta & Kim, 2008; Kenett et al., 2022). Finally, our study 
resembles some aspects of the above studies that used a hybrid SEM- 
ANN approach to detect non-linearities and validate PLS-SEM results, 
but we propose a different group of algorithms, as we argue next. 
2.2. Selected ML algorithms to complement PLS-SEM 
In research using ML, evaluating one or multiple algorithms to 
identify the most suitable one for a given task is standard practice. A 
combination of factors determines the algorithm selection, which 
include its alignment with the research objectives and practical con­
siderations. Table 2 provides an overview of six groups of models that 
can be used to generate predictions or to investigate causal relationships 
in the data. The term “model” in ML is not to be confused with the 
stuctural model in PLS-SEM; in ML it refers to algorithms that predict or 
identify patterns in the data. 
Business researchers who combined PLS-SEM with ML have pre­
dominantly used ANN to validate their PLS-SEM findings and identify 
non-linearities We propose a different set of algorithms to achieve these 
objectives: initially, we implement BN for the exploration of new 
relationships in the data, followed by the application of MARS and GAM, 
which excel at uncovering non-linearities and interactions with greater 
interpretative clarity (see the bolded assessments Table 2). We present a 
more detailed comparison of these algorithms below to provide back­
ground information relevant to supporting our algorithm selection. 
ANN are inspired by how the brain functions and belong to the class 
of black-box models. These networks learn and detect patterns in data by 
adjusting the weights and biases of the connections between their in­
ternal nodes (neurons), without explicit programming. ANN’ ability to 
simulate non-linear interactions using activation functions is one of their 
key features, allowing them to capture complex patterns in the data. 
They are beneficial in processing large volumes of data, which makes 
them suitable for industries like marketing (Leong et al., 2020; Lo et al., 
2022; Ray et al., 2021). ANN allow us to evaluate the predictors’ 
importance, for instance by using sensitivity analyses, but it is difficult 
to explain how the model arrives at its predictions (LeCun et al., 2015). 
The transparency property is, however, relevant in many business ap­
plications, where it is important to understand how the model arrives at 
its predictions. Additionally, such understanding is relevant to PLS-SEM 
researchers to support translating the findings into future conceptual 
models. 
BN represent a further group of algorithms that can be beneficial in 
Fig. 1. Theory-driven model testing and data-driven model discovery. *Note: There are ML approaches that can be used for theory testing purposes, for instance, 
specific forms of BN (see, e.g., Druzdzel & Simon, 1993). 
Table 1 
PLS-SEM and ML: Review of previous approaches in business research.  
Approach 
N◦of 
articles 
Major Purposes 
(multiple coding enabled) 
Main algorithms/ techniques used 
Illustrative 
references 
PRE-PLS-SEM: 
ML before using 
PLS-SEM 
7 
Topic/ construct 
development (N = 3) 
Text-mining, sentiment analysis, data mining 
Sanchez-Franco et al., 2019 
Model development / 
exploration (N = 4) 
BN using directed a-cyclic graphs (DAGs), applying various 
algorithms (e.g., hill-climbing) (N = 3) 
ANN 
Mandhani et al., 2020; Sener et al., 2019* 
POST-PLS-SEM: 
ML after 
using PLS-SEM 
31 
Identify non-linearities (N = 23) 
Robustness test/ validation of PLS- 
SEM findings (N = 8) 
Capture non-compensatory 
associations (N = 8) 
ANN (N = 26); mostly combined with sensitivity analysis 
Other approaches: Naïve Bayes, decision trees, logistic 
regression, random forest, support vector machines 
Leong et al., 2020; Lo et al., 2022Loh 
et al., 2022; Sener et al., 2019* 
*Sener et al. (2019) is the only article coded twice as it can be categorized both as pre- and post-PLS-SEM. They use universal structural equation modeling, which was 
one of the first ML approaches acknowledged in the PLS-SEM community (Rigdon et al., 2010; Sharma et al., 2021). 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
4
exploring new structural relationships. Also known as graphical causal 
models, Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG), or non-parametric structural 
equation models (Pearl, 2012a), BN serve for both prediction and causal 
inferencing (Pearl, 1988). They offer transparency and easy under­
standing. The graphical structure comprises nodes representing 
observed or latent variables and (directed) edges or arcs representing 
variable dependencies. In BN terminology, the node from which an arc 
directs outwards is a ‘parent’ node, and the node with an arc directed 
inwards is a ‘child’ node. Child nodes are equivalent to endogenous 
variables, while parent nodes without incoming arcs are considered 
exogenous variables. This network structure facilitates identifying as­
sociations between variables, as well as discovering mediating variables 
(Neapolitan & Jiang, 2007). While typically employed in discrete vari­
able settings, BN can be adapted to handle continuous variables using a 
Gaussian distribution to model the probability density function of each 
variable (e.g., Scutari, 2007). Additional approaches for continuous 
variables include kernel density estimates, Gaussian mixtures, and 
copulas for continuous variables (Koller & Friedman, 2009). A dis­
tinguishing feature of BN is that both the model structure and the 
model’s parameters can be learned from the data. Learning BN involve 
determining the graphical structure through algorithms like constraint- 
based, score-based and hybrid methods. These algorithms search for the 
structure that best fits the data or they optimize the network structure 
for prediction. Once the network structure is learned, parameter esti­
mation is performed using techniques such as maximum likelihood and 
Bayesian estimation. Overall, BN algorithms reveal hidden patterns in 
the data that might not be immediately evident. Hence, the relationships 
between nodes identified by BN offer novel insights for conceptualizing 
structural models and, potentially, for advancing new theory (Druzdzel 
& Simon, 1993). 
Both MARS and GAM are powerful and flexible ML methods for 
identifying and understanding non-linear relationships and interactions 
without the researcher having to manually reshape the data beforehand 
(Hastie et al., 2009a; James et al., 2021). MARS employs hinge functions 
to model the relationship between an outcome and a combination of 
different predictors. This approach can identify important interactions 
between predictors (Friedman, 1991). GAM offer a complementary 
understanding of the relationship between each predictor variable and 
the outcome. In GAM, each predictor-outcome relationship is individ­
ually modeled, and the final model aggregates these relationships 
(James et al., 2021). While GAM are limited to additivity, the valuable 
interactions unearthed by MARS can enhance GAM’ insights. Hence, 
MARS and GAM are good candidates for enriching the PLS-SEM insights 
by identifying non-linearities that include interactions and for validating 
findings in a more transparent way than ANN. 
ML algorithms involve hyperparameters3 that are fine-tuned to 
optimize their performance, influencing how the model learns and 
generalizes to new data. Unlike parameters, which directly capture data 
patterns, hyperparameters guide the learning process. Their fine-tuning 
Table 2 
Overview of selected ML algorithms.  
ML algorithms        
Linear regression 
with 
regularization1 
MARS and 
GAM1 
Regression trees1 
Bagging, Boosting, 
Random forests1 
ANN2 
BN (Directed Acyclic Graphs, 
DAGs)3  
White box 
White box 
White box 
Black box 
Black box 
White box 
Core feature 
Control model 
complexity, prevent 
overfitting 
Identify & 
explain non- 
linearities 
Graphical model 
representation & 
transparency 
Control overfitting & 
increase 
generalization (stable 
& robust) 
Identify complex non- 
linearities; large-scale/ 
high-dimensional data; 
strongest predictive 
power 
Model complexities (multiple 
causes/ outcomes); handles 
uncertain/ incomplete 
information; graphical model 
representation 
Capability to…       
…be used on small, 
high-dimensional 
data 
High 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
…determine 
importance of 
predictors 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
…handle complex 
non-linear 
relationships 
Low 
High 
Moderate 
High 
High 
Moderate 
…enable 
explanation of 
non-linearities 
Low 
High 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Moderate 
…handle complex 
interactions 
Low 
High 
Moderate 
High 
High 
High 
…enable inference 
of causality from 
data 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
High 
Further practical 
consideration       
Non– parametric 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Accuracy 
Good 
Excellent 
Good 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Interpreta-bility 
High 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
High 
Training time 
Fast 
Moderate 
Fast 
Moderate 
Long 
Moderate 
Transparency of 
prediction 
mechanisms 
High 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Low 
High 
Recommended 
software package 
in R: 
glmnet; caret; MASS 
earth; caret; 
mgcv; gam 
Rpart; caret 
randomForest; gbm 
nnet; nlsr; rminer; 
validann 
bnlearn; gRain 
Source: 1 Hastie et al., 2009a; Hastie et al., 2009b; James et al., 2021; 2Goodfellow et al., 2016; 3Pearl, 1988; 2012b. 
3 Some examples of hyperparameters are: the learning rate and the activation 
function in ANN, the number of hinge functions and the degree of interaction in 
MARS, the smoothing parameters and the number and placement of knots in 
GAM (Friedman, 1991; Hastie et al., 2009a; James et al., 2021). 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
5
Table 3 
Selected relevant metrics and routines to evaluate and choose between models in PLS-SEM and ML.  
Metric/ technique/ concept 
Definition and interpretation 
Typically 
used in 
PLS- 
SEM 
ML 
Root Mean Squared Error 
(RMSE) 
A metric to assess a model’s predictive power; smaller values indicate higher predictive power. Calculated as the square root of 
the average of the squared differences between the predicted and the actual values. The value depends on the scaling of the 
(observed or latent) variables used. 
In PLS-SEM, the model choice relates to evaluating whether the RMSE of the research model is < RMSE of the LM benchmark 
model (e.g., Shmueli et al., 2019). In ML there is no universally defined benchmark for the RMSE; the model choice often 
follows the lowest RMSE or selects the one that is one standard deviation away from the lowest RMSE (to avoid overfitting;  
James et al., 2021). Similar to PLS-SEM’s IA approach (see below), some authors propose comparing the RMSE of the model to 
the RMSE of a naïve benchmark that predicts the mean or median value of the target variable (Torgo, 2017). 
Yes 
Yes 
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) 
A metric to assess a model’s predictive power; smaller values indicate higher predictive power. Calculated as the average 
absolute difference between the predicted and the actual values. It implies treating all errors equally, regardless of their 
magnitude, and therefore, it is used when all errors are considered equally costly. MAE might be more robust than RMSE in 
situations where outliers are present. The value depends on the scaling of the (observed or latent) variables used. 
The insights presented on model choice in PLS-SEM and in ML for RMSE can be likewise applied to the MAE (see above). 
Yes 
Yes 
Bayesian 
Information Criterion 
(BIC) 
A metric to compare models based on their fit to data and complexity; smaller values generally indicate higher predictive 
power. Its calculation involves a log-likelihood function, the sum of squared errors, the sample size, and the number of 
predictors of the construct of interest or the number of parameters in the model; with this, it penalizes complex models and 
prevents overfitting (MacKay, 2003). It depends on the scaling of observed or latent variables used. 
In PLS-SEM, it is used to choose between models (e.g., a model with a BIC of −200 is preferred over a model with a BIC of −50). 
Can be complemented with the BIC-based Akaike weights that provide insight on the model’s relative likelihood in percentage; 
higher percentage values indicate a higher (better) likelihood (e.g., Hair et al., 2022). In ML, smaller BIC values are also better. 
An exception is the BIC in the bnlearn package: here BIC is subject to a rescaling, so that higher values are better (Scutari, 2007). 
Larger differences in BIC values favor one model over another, but there is no fixed minimum difference in BIC values that 
universally indicates whether one model is better than another. Context and domain knowledge matter in BIC-based model 
selection, therefore using multiple criteria (e.g., k-fold cross-validated RMSE) is advised (Hastie et al., 2009b; Kuhn & Johnson, 
2013). 
Yes 
Yes 
Q2-predict 
A benchmark metric to assess a model’s predictive power in PLS-SEM. It uses the mean value of the variables in a training 
sample which acts as prediction for the variables in the holdout sample (called naïve benchmark) and is calculated as one minus 
the quotient of the PLS path model’s sum of the squared prediction errors in relation to the mean value’s sum of the squared 
prediction errors. If Q2-predict > 0, it signifies that the PLS-SEM prediction error is smaller (i.e., better) than that of the naïve 
benchmark. 
It supports the model evaluation by evaluating whether the Q2-predict > 0. If this is not the case, predictive relevance is not 
confirmed. If it is the case, the evaluation continues with the RMSE (if prediction errors are highly symmetrically distributed) 
or the MAE (Shmueli et al., 2019). 
Yes 
No 
Indicator-averages (IA) benchmark 
A benchmark used in the context of predictive model assessment in PLS-SEM. The IA are the indicator averages from the 
training sample and are used as predicted values, or as a naïve benchmark prediction. The prediction errors of this IA procedure 
are compared to the prediction errors of the PLS-SEM prediction. Researchers aim for lower prediction errors of their PLS-SEM 
prediction (Hair et al., 2019; Shmueli et al., 2019). 
Yes 
No 
Linear regression model (LM) 
benchmark 
A benchmark used in the context of predictive model assessment in PLS-SEM. A LM generates predictions for the endogenous 
indicators by running linear regressions with each endogenous indicator as dependent and all exogenous indicators as 
independent variables. The prediction errors of this LM procedure are compared to the prediction errors of the PLS-SEM 
prediction. Researchers aim for lower prediction errors of their PLS-SEM prediction (Hair et al., 2019; Shmueli et al., 2019). 
Yes 
No 
k-fold cross validation 
A technique that enables the predictive model assessment based on holdout-samples that are created by dividing the available 
dataset into k subsamples or folds. The kth subsample is designated as the holdout-sample, while the remaining k-1 subsamples 
are used to estimate the model, i.e., as the training sample. This process is repeated k times each time designating a different 
subsample as the holdout sample. 
In PLS-SEM, the recommendation is to set k to 10, as long as the minimum sample size requirements in the PLS-SEM context for 
the training sample are met; the recommendation is to repeat the k-fold cross-validation 10 times, to average out potential 
abnormal solutions from a partition (see Shmueli et al., 2016; Hair et al., 2019; Shmueli et al., 2019; Liengaard et al., 2021). In 
ML, setting k to 10 similarly stands as the most common choice based on several past studies (Kohavi, 1995; Bouckaert, 2003; 
Refaeilzadeh et al., 2009). In the same way, to ensure a reliable performance estimation the recommendation is to conduct the 
k-fold cross-validation multiple - often 10 times - to achieve a larger number of estimates, leading to a more robust performance 
evaluation (Bouckaert, 2003; Refaeilzadeh et al., 2009). 
Yes 
Yes 
Overfitting 
Overfitting describes a situation in which the model fits the dataset used very well, but is less able to predict new data, and 
thereby to generalize to other samples. To avoid this situation, routines that separate training and holdout samples are used. 
A comparison of the distribution of the prediction errors in the holdout or new sample with the training sample (in-sample 
cases) can help to diagnose overfitting: a large difference in favor of the training sample prediction indicates potential 
overfitting (Shmueli et al., 2016). 
In PLS-SEM, an excessive R2 (e.g., ≥90 %) similarly indicates a potential model overfit (Hair et al., 2022). In ML, the 
performance of the model on the training data and the validation data is compared. If a model yields a small training RMSE but 
a large test RMSE, it indicates overfitting. Also, learning curves with performance trends are evaluated: If the gap between 
training performance and validation performance widens as more training iterations or examples are added, it indicates 
overfitting (James et al., 2021). 
Yes 
Yes 
(continued on next page) 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
6
is essential for balancing model complexity with the ability to fit the 
training data, ultimately enhancing predictive accuracy. 
2.3. Metrics and techniques to evaluate and select models 
PLS-SEM shares several features in evaluating models with the 
broader range of techniques employed in ML (see also Table 3). These 
encompass metrics to assess the predictive power of models by 
comparing the predicted and actual values: the root mean squared error 
(RMSE) and the mean absolute error (MAE), which indicate higher 
predictive power by smaller values. Also, information-theoretic model 
selection criteria are used in both PLS-SEM and ML. In particular, the 
Bayesian information criterion (BIC; Schwarz, 1978) can assist in iden­
tifying reasonable models that optimize predictive accuracy and at the 
same time balance model fit and complexity to avoid overfitting (Gre­
gor, 2006; McQuarrie & Tsai, 1998; Shmueli et al., 2019). 
The two approaches also distinguish between a training sample (for 
PLS-SEM estimation or model learning in ML) and a holdout sample 
(used in validation or cross-validation). Likewise, they use k-fold cross- 
validation to generate multiple holdout samples for improved test metric 
reliability. This technique divides the data into subsamples (or folds), 
subsequently using distinct subsamples iteratively for training and 
testing. To illustrate, Shmueli et al. (2016) developed the PLSpredict 
routine. This approach estimates the model parameters (e.g., path co­
efficients, weights, and loadings of indicators) using a training sample. It 
then applies the model to predict the endogenous constructs’ indicator 
scores. The predicted values for cases in the holdout sample are then 
compared to the actual values of the indicators in the raw data to 
evaluate the model’s predictive accuracy (Shmueli et al., 2016; Shmueli 
et al., 2019). If the aim is to predict an endogenous construct score, the 
routine is adapted because there are no actual endogenous construct 
scores in the raw data unless estimated. Following Danks et al. (2017) 
the entire sample is used to estimate composite scores for the endoge­
nous constructs. These scores are called “actual* (actual-star) composite 
scores” and serve as proxies for the actual scores of the holdout cases to 
evaluate the model’s predictive accuracy. 
In addition, the PLS-SEM research community has developed 
benchmarking routines (e.g., the linear regression model (LM) bench­
marks), test statistics, and decision trees (e.g., Shmueli et al., 2019) to 
evaluate the predictive power of alternative PLS-SEM models (see 
Table 3). These can aid the selection of competing data-driven or theory- 
driven models. Notably, to compare two conceptual models’ predictive 
ability, Liengaard et al. (2021) proposed the CVPAT test which was 
recently extended by the capability to compare two models regarding 
specific constructs’ prediction accuracy (Sharma et al., 2023). To select 
a suitable model, authors propose first comparing the BIC of the alter­
native models. If the BIC differences between models are however small, 
researchers are advised to compare models using the CVPAT statistical 
test (Hair et al., 2022). Nonetheless, particularly if the models to be 
compared have resulted from an exploratory process, the alignment of 
model selection with theoretical or conceptual considerations remains 
crucial. 
In PLS-SEM, the model selection process remains confined to con­
structing and evaluating a restricted array of alternative models or 
theories. The selection is inevitably influenced by the researcher’s 
perspective and assumptions. Considering this limitation, we recom­
mend leveraging PLS-SEM’s predictive capabilities in joint ML and PLS- 
SEM approaches. 
3. A proposal to combine PLS-SEM and selected ML algorithms 
in future studies 
We recommend transferring insights from the BN, MARS, and GAM 
algorithms into PLS-SEM. Specifically, we propose a routine to explore 
new relationships between existing constructs, improve existing con­
ceptual models, and to compare an existing model with one or more 
improved ones (see Fig. 2). 
3.1. Step 1: Create and estimate a baseline model in PLS-SEM including 
PLSpredict 
The first step is to create a PLS-SEM on an initial conceptual model 
involving baseline theorizing. For this model, the researcher needs to 
prepare and check the data following the PLS-SEM standards, consid­
ering threshold values for more exploratory purposes (e.g., Hair et al., 
2022). This model can form the baseline benchmark the researcher aims 
to improve by combining PLS-SEM and ML approaches. 
We propose extracting the latent variables scores from PLS-SEM to be 
used in ML models. These scores can be based on the initial conceptual 
model. Generating these composite or latent variable scores in PLS-SEM 
considers the structural model’s context, that is, the scores represent the 
underlying modeled theory (Hair et al., 2017; Rigdon et al., 2019). Using 
the initial theoretical model to extract latent variable scores, therefore, 
implicitly involves the relationships modeled. This strategy has been 
implemented by most researchers who combined ML and PLS-SEM in the 
past and could be one way forward. Another way forward that considers 
the overall context of constructs while avoiding creating latent variables 
scores based on pre-specified relationships, is to create a path model that 
connects all exogenous latent variables involved in the initial theoretical 
model with one another and with the key exogenous target construct to 
be predicted. Thereby we consider the full context of constructs. The 
latent variable scores are then estimated using the factor weighting 
scheme, which, unlike the path weighing scheme, does not differentiate 
different directions of relationships between constructs (e.g., Sarstedt 
Table 3 (continued) 
Metric/ technique/ concept 
Definition and interpretation 
Typically 
used in 
PLS- 
SEM 
ML 
Loss 
A concept of relevance to the CVPAT test in PLS-SEM; a lower loss implies a lower (i.e., better) prediction error. Calculated for 
each case in the sample as the average squared prediction error over all indicators that are used to measure the endogenous 
latent variable(s). A model’s overall loss is the average of all individual losses, i.e., the losses for each case. 
In the context of the test, the difference between the average losses of two models in predicting the indicators of the endogenous 
variables is referred to. The model with the lower loss is superior (Liengaard et al., 2021; Sharma et al., 2023). 
Yes 
No 
Cross-validated predictive ability 
test (CVPAT) 
A test statistic to assess and compare the predictive power of model(s). It enables a statistical significance test that refers to the 
loss difference between models. It refers to the difference in the average out-of-sample predictive accuracy between two 
competing models when predicting the indicators of all or specific endogenous construct(s). It can be applied to specific 
endogenous constructs of interest or to the overall model, i.e., to all endogenous constructs. The model with the smaller loss is 
preferred. 
If the loss of Model 1 minus the loss of Model 2 ≤0, then Model 1 is preferred; if the loss of Model 1 minus the loss of Model 2 
> 0 and statistically significant (for instance, with p < 0.05), then Model 2 is preferred (see Liengaard et al., 2021; Sharma 
et al., 2023). 
Yes 
No 
Note: This list is not exhaustive; it only refers to metrics/ techniques / concepts discussed in this manuscript. 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
7
et al., 2022c). This could be advantageous to avoid a biased assessment 
of the model structure and performance when the ML approaches are 
being implemented. 
3.2. Step 2: Apply selected ML algorithms on the latent variable scores 
extracted 
3.2.1. Explore the model structure using BN algorithms 
For the context of this study, the retrieved scores can be employed in 
the ML framework for one of two objectives. First, they can be used in 
BN to discover existing and non-existing associations and mediating 
effects among variables. BN operationalize causal assumptions by 
aligning them with observable data, delineating variables’ associations, 
and statistical independencies (Elwert, 2013). The architecture of BN 
allows for adding “a priori” knowledge, which can be combined with 
data exploration efforts. This pre-existing knowledge, particularly 
regarding the presence or non-existence of a relationship between var­
iables (i.e., the “structure prior”) can aid model structure learning. In 
searching for the best BN structure and therewith for alternative models, 
the researcher can use two main approaches: constraint-based and score- 
based algorithms. 
Constraint-based algorithms operate through a series of constraints 
to infer the conditional independence relationships between variables. 
These constraints are used to search for the optimal structure that ex­
plains the observed data, and thereby forms the final BN structure 
(Spirtes et al., 2000). A key step in the process is the independence test. 
It determines whether, given a set of variables, two selected variables 
are conditionally independent. This procedure involves comparing the 
observed data against the distribution expected if the two variables were 
independent. The goal is to construct a structure that exclusively en­
compasses relationships existing within the actual data. One of the most 
well-known algorithms used in BN is the Grow-Shrink (GS) algorithm 
(see a discussion in: Neapolitan, 2003; Neapolitan & Jiang, 2007). Other 
common constraint-based algorithms include the Incremental Associa­
tion (Tsamardinos et al., 2003), and the Fast Incremental Association 
algorithm (Yaramakala & Margaritis, 2005). While these algorithms 
yield similar structures, we chose to report and recommend the GS al­
gorithm (Margaritis, 2003) due to its established presence in the liter­
ature and its associated accumulated knowledge (Srivastava et al., 
2023). It starts with an empty graph and iteratively adds or removes 
relationships based on a test criterion (like the conditional independence 
tests, i.e., partial correlation tests4) and the level of significance set by 
the analyst. It focuses on finding the overall structure of the network and 
offers information on relationships between variables, including the 
direction (though sometimes just reporting an association without a 
direction). Its limits are primarily in its background assumptions 
involving the non-existence of unmeasured common causes in the data 
and the parametric assumption that the causal dependencies can be 
modeled by linear functions (Rau & Scheines, 2012). 
Score-based algorithms find the structure that best fits the data, 
based on a scoring function (e.g., BIC) that measures the quality of the fit 
(Scutari & Denis, 2021). By finding the structure that optimizes the 
score, the algorithm can identify the relationships between the variables 
that the data most supports. The Hill-Climbing (HC) algorithm is a well- 
known score-based algorithm. It is a greedy algorithm that adds one 
relationship at a time based on local optima (Neapolitan, 2003). Due to 
the greedy nature of this search approach, the model building process is 
repeated numerous times with alternative initialization settings. The 
algorithm automatically chooses the model with the best score (i.e., the 
best BIC; Neapolitan, 2003). 
Both the GS and the HC algorithms offer graphical representations of 
the model, illustrating directed relationships between the variables (or 
constructs) with arrows and non-directed relationships with lines. These 
visualizations assist in validating established relationships, highlighting 
non-existing relationships, and identifying new relationships, including 
mediation effects. The algorithms also generate cross-validated RMSE 
and BIC values which, moreover, can assist us in understanding poten­
tial improvements on the benchmark model in PLS-SEM. 
3.2.2. Identify non-linearities and interactions using MARS and GAM 
Subsequently, these scores (and models found) can be used to 
discover non-linear relationships and interaction effects, for which we 
recommend the use of MARS and GAM (Hastie et al., 2009a; James et al., 
2021). MARS allows for representing non-linear relationships through a 
piecewise linear approach, effectively decomposing complex relation­
ships into a succession of linear segments. To specify, MARS recursively 
partitions the predictor space into smaller regions and fits a linear 
regression model into each region called “hinge functions”. The position 
and shape of the hinge function reveal the specific input space region 
where a predictor has the most impact on the target variable. A signif­
icant positive coefficient associated with a hinge function, such as h(x- 
a), indicates a non-linear relationship, with “x” as the input variable 
and “a” as the threshold value that marks the boundary between 
different regions of the input space. The hinge functions can also identify 
interaction effects between predictors, for example, when the input 
space is split based on the values of two predictors. However, inter­
preting the results should be done cautiously because the non-linearities 
found with MARS might not necessarily hold in PLS-SEM. This 
discrepancy can arise, for instance, because significant interactions that 
are found may only apply to a specific range and not the full range of 
input values of the variables involved. 
GAM enhance the modeling of complex relationships by partitioning 
the predictor space and applying polynomial basis functions in each 
partition, for increased modeling flexibility. To assess non-linearity be­
tween predictors and outcomes, researchers typically examine the esti­
mated effective degrees of freedom (edf) from GAM (Wood, 2006). The 
edf values provide insight into the extent of non-linearity in the rela­
tionship: an edf of 1 implies a linear association, an edf between 1 and 2 
indicates mild non-linearity, and an edf above 2 represents substantial 
non-linearity. This interpretation is based on the idea that the edf re­
flects the number of knots - junction points of the piecewise polynomial 
components - in the model fitting (Wood, 2006). Conventionally, a 
model selection process involves fitting GAM with progressively fewer 
knots, seeking a parsimonious model that retains the relationship’s 
essential features, as determined by graphical inspection. This stepwise 
reduction in knots limits the complexity of the model, yielding a more 
conservative edf estimation. Using the mgcv package in R (Wood, 2022) 
researchers can automatically determine the optimal level of non- 
linearity (number of knots) for GAM models through cross-validation, 
streamlining the model fitting process (Wood, 2022). 
Although MARS and GAM are not designed to test variable networks 
or structural models, they offer valuable insights through partial de­
pendency plots with confidence intervals, enabling us to understand the 
form of the relationships better. Additionally, an analysis of deviance 
(James et al., 2021) can be used to determine which of the models is 
best. If the non-linear model has a significantly lower deviance than the 
linear model, it suggests a better fit to the data. Further, criteria such as 
the RMSE, the MAE, and the BIC values can help assess the significance 
of the non-linear relationships compared to alternative models. 
3.3. Step 3: Assess the theoretical plausibility of models and relationships 
identified 
Determining causal relationships from observational data alone is 
challenging (Bollen & Pearl, 2013; Pearl, 2000). Researchers are advised 
to evaluate the promising models following theoretical considerations, 
4 Voortman and Druzdzel (2008) demonstrated experimentally that the par­
tial correlation test is very robust against departures from normality, and thus, 
yields robust results. Only if the deviation from multivariate normality is very 
large, the test might yield incorrect results. 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
8
that is, they need to assess whether there is a causal explanation that 
could underlie relationships. Hence, after having identified a set of well- 
performing alternative models using the BN algorithms, the researcher 
would be well advised to evaluate the theoretical plausibility of these 
models and relationships (asking whether the indicated new linear re­
lationships are consistent with theory or plausible theoretical mecha­
nisms). Similarly, the researcher should determine whether there is a 
theoretical logic that can undermine a potential interaction effect indi­
cated in MARS. And finally, researchers should ask about a possible 
reason for hypothesizing a non-linear mechanism that fits the form 
indicated by the MARS and GAM models. 
In this step, the researcher might need to identify potentially alter­
native theories and engage in theory development, if the relationships 
indicated offer room for new causal mechanisms to be outlined between 
constructs. We recommend engaging in this theoretical plausibility test 
early to avoid further development leading in a confounding direction. 
For instance, if the researcher has tested for alternative linear models, 
the theoretical plausibility assessment may precede a further test for 
non-linearities. Otherwise, the further implementation and testing of 
models in PLS-SEM could become quite complex and might involve 
models that will not be useful for later theory development. 
Fig. 2. Step-by-step guideline to combine PLS-SEM and selected ML algorithms.  
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
9
3.4. Step 4: Create and compare alternative models identified in PLS-SEM 
In step 4, going beyond previous approaches, we recommend 
modeling the new structures, interactions and non-linearities (that 
passed the theoretical plausibility test) in PLS-SEM. Modeling these re­
lationships allows researchers to profit from the interpretability of PLS- 
SEM findings and enables them to apply recent test procedures in the 
PLS-SEM context, especially CVPAT (Liengaard et al., 2021; Sharma 
et al., 2023) to compare alternative or competing models. Thus, the 
researchers can use the well-established quality criteria in PLS-SEM, 
both predictive and explanatory, to assess the baseline conceptual 
model against a series of competing theoretically and data-driven 
plausible models. 
Similar to modeling potentially new linear relationships, the 
modeling of indicated interaction effects is straightforward (see also 
Becker et al., 2023). In addition, the researcher can represent non- 
linearities by exponentiating the input values and then apply a linear 
model to these values. The non-linear effects can be modeled in PLS-SEM 
as higher-order terms (typically quadratic) based on the visual inspec­
tion of shapes of the partial dependency plots in MARS and GAM. 
Quadratic (progressive and degressive) relationships are still easy to 
interpret and theorize. The higher the degree of the polynomial, the 
more complex the theorizing, though in some fields, this is common, and 
researchers hypothesize, for instance, on S-curve effects (e.g., Contractor 
et al., 2003; Richter, 2007). 
Having created all alternative models in PLS-SEM, we follow the 
routine given in Sharma et al. (2023) and compare the proposed models’ 
RMSE or MAE with the naïve prediction benchmark (i.e., IA and LM) to 
ensure that they meet the minimum predictive accuracy requirements. If 
these requirements are met, we compare the models by focusing on the 
BIC and the key target constructs’ prediction accuracy using the CVPAT 
test on the construct level (see also Hair et al., 2022). This assessment 
offers the input for the researcher to identify the best model and engage 
in further theorizing. Additionally, researchers can complement the 
analysis by evaluating the quality criteria in ML compared to the quality 
criteria reported in PLS-SEM (e.g., the RMSE and BIC used in both ap­
proaches). Better performance metrics generated in the ML environment 
could point to complex model structures and relationships that the 
researcher might not be able to represent accurately in PLS-SEM (e.g., 
due to the constraints in modeling extreme non-linearities). 
4. Illustrative example: UTAUT 
To illustrate the combined use of PLS-SEM and our selected ML al­
gorithms, we used the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Tech­
nology (UTAUT) model by Venkatesh et al. (2003) and the data provided 
by Al-Gahtani et al. (2007). The dataset which contains 722 observa­
tions and 21 indicators (see Appendix 1), is available as an example in 
SmartPLS 4 (Ringle et al., 2022). In its original form, it involves two 
endogenous constructs, the behavioral intention (BI) and the use 
behavior (USE), as well as four exogenous constructs, performance ex­
pectancy (PE), effort expectancy (EE), social influence (SN), and facili­
tating conditions (FC). The conceptual model is given in Fig. 3, left-hand 
side. 
Cho et al. (2022a) used this model to illustrate a prediction- 
orientated specification search algorithm that, similarly to our 
approach, has the objective of revealing structural models that maxi­
mize predictive accuracy. Specifically, the algorithm searches for a 
structural model that minimizes the target variables prediction errors 
based on generalized structured component analyses (GSCA). The au­
thors identify an improved version of the original UTAUT that performs 
better in terms of prediction metrics and is theoretically reasonable. This 
model is also given in Fig. 3, right-hand side. We refer to both models for 
benchmarking the performance of the ML approaches presented. 
4.1. Step 1: Create and estimate a PLS-SEM including PLSpredict 
First, we estimated the original model using the PLS algorithm with 
SmartPLS 4 (Ringle et al., 2022). As the large majority of criteria meet 
the required thresholds, we find the measurement models’ quality 
satisfactory (see Appendix 2). We do not discuss these further since 
evaluating measurement models has become a well-documented stan­
dard routine (e.g., Hair et al., 2022; Sarstedt et al., 2023). Having 
ensured sufficient quality of measurement models, we turn to the 
structural model results provided in Table 4 and to the results of the 
PLSpredict routine using k-folds cross-validation presented in Table 5. 
The VIFs are all clearly below the critical level of 5 (see Becker et al., 
2015), which indicates that multicollinearity is no problem in the 
structural model. This model satisfactorily explains BI and USE with 
moderate R2 values of 0.353 and 0.250 (Hair et al., 2019). Also, the 
modeled relationships receive empirical support: all path coefficients 
are significant (p < 0.05), and the strongest associations are found for BI 
on USE, and EE on BI. The PLSpredict routine demonstrates that the 
model does have predictive validity in that the Q2-predict values are 
above zero and the PLS-SEM predictions outperform the IA benchmarks; 
however, the PLS-SEM predictions’ RMSE and MAE values are higher 
than those of the LM benchmark for all BI and USE indicators (except 
USE2) and overall (Shmueli et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2023). The RMSE 
of the BI construct indicators vary between 1.052 and 1.243, the RMSE 
of the USE construct vary between 0.069 and 0.085. The RMSE for the 
endogenous constructs is 0.815 for BI and 0.937 for USE. Hence, in terms 
of its predictive accuracy, this model could be improved, which makes it 
a good fit for our illustrative purposes. 
To generate latent variable scores to be used in the ML setting, we 
estimated a full model that connects all constructs using the factor 
weighting scheme (see Appendix 3). Thereby, we consider the full context 
of constructs, but do not imply a specific theoretical model in estimating 
the scores. To understand the difference between the full model latent 
variables scores and the latent variables scores derived from the PLS 
algorithm on the original UTAUT, we evaluated the correlations be­
tween the two kinds of latent variable scores. We found the lowest 
correlation for FC with a correlation coefficient of 0.957 (p < 0.001); the 
latent variable scores of EE, PE, SN, and USE are perfectly correlated, i. 
e., they have a correlation coefficient of one. Additionally, we analyzed 
the score differences, which point to some rather minor disparities (see 
Appendix 4). 
4.2. Step 2: Apply selected ML algorithms on the latent variable scores 
extracted 
4.2.1. Explore the model structure using BN algorithms 
In the second step, we applied a BN for causal discovery that could 
assist in validating the model’s causal structure. To identify potential 
new causal relationships including mediating effects, we used the latent 
variable scores extracted from PLS-SEM as input data for learning the 
BN. We implemented a constraint-based algorithm, GS, and a score- 
based algorithm, HC, using the software R and the package bnlearn 
(Scutari, 2007). We undertook a structure search that relied on prior 
information, which allowed us to include (whitelist) or exclude (black­
list) certain relationships in the learning process. Blacklisting constrains 
the algorithm’s search space by excluding relationships that conceptu­
ally are unlikely or impossible to occur. In our example, we blacklisted 
the relationships from the supposed endogenous constructs USE and BI to 
the exogenous predictors (PE, EE, SN, FC) based on the rich technology 
adoption research that considered the determinants of intention and 
behavior (e.g., Blut et al., 2022). 
Fig. 4 on the left-hand side shows the model structure resulting from 
the GS algorithm. It identifies significant relationships (5 % threshold) 
that have a direction from one construct to the other (arrows) and 
conditional dependencies (lines). The identified structure resembles the 
original model, with BI as a mediating construct. Additionally, it 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
10
includes one new directed relationship from FC to BI. Hence, the learned 
structure confirmed all the relationships proposed in the original model 
and discovered an additional directed relationship. Also, it pinpointed 
some associations without an explicit direction reflecting an interde­
pendency between constructs (the associations between EE and FC, EE 
and PE, and PE and SN). 
On the right-hand side, Fig. 4 visualizes the model structure indi­
cated by the HC algorithm that optimizes the model’s goodness of fit to 
the data with a penalty for the number of parameters in the structural 
model (using the BIC). The algorithm stops when no more relationships 
Fig. 3. The original UTAUT (left) and the GSCA-improved UTAUT (right) in PLS-SEM. Source: original UTAUT, left, Venkatesh et al., 2003; GSCA-improved UTAUT, 
right, Cho et al., 2022a. 
Table 4 
PLS-SEM results structural model: Original UTAUT model.  
Path 
VIF 
< 5 
Path coefficient 
95 % CI 
Significant 
(p < 0.05)? 
f2 effect size 
PE → BI 
1.307  
0.215 
[0.134; 0.298] 
Yes  
0.054 
EE → BI 
1.243  
0.362 
[0.292; 0.432] 
Yes  
0.163 
SN → BI 
1.133  
0.208 
[0.135; 0.278] 
Yes  
0.059 
FC → USE 
1.284  
0.198 
[0.126; 0.276] 
Yes  
0.041 
BI → USE 
1.284  
0.375 
[0.285; 0.458] 
Yes  
0.146 
R2 BI 
0.353  
R2
adjusted BI 
0.350 
BIC BI 
−288.775 
R2 USE 
0.250  
R2
adjusted USE 
0.248 
BIC USE 
−189.367 
Note: Total effects: PE → USE: 0.081 (p < 0.05); EE → USE: 0.136 (p < 0.05); SN → USE: 0.078 (p < 0.05). 
We used the percentile bootstrapping procedure with 5,000 subsamples. 
Table 5 
PLSpredict results: Original UTAUT model.  
Indicator 
Q2predict 
> 0 
PLS-SEM 
RMSE 
LM 
RMSE 
PLS-SEM – LM 
RMSE < 0 
PLS-SEM loss – IA benchmark loss < 0 
PLS-SEM loss – LM benchmark loss < 0 
BI1 
BI2 
BI3 
0.187 
0.049 
0.291 
1.052 
1.243 
1.169 
1.031 
1.213 
1.153 
0.021 
0.030 
0.016   
USE1 
USE2 
USE3 
USE4 
0.074 
0.069 
0.085 
0.073 
1.485 
1.166 
1.298 
2.262 
1.484 
1.169 
1.277 
2.228 
0.001 
−0.003 
0.021 
0.034   
BI 
0.341 
0.815    
−0.299**  
0.051* 
USE 
0.129 
0.937    
−0.209**  
0.050 
Overall      
−0.247**  
0.051* 
Note: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01. 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
11
can be added without improving the BIC score (see Table 3, and the 
specifics for the BIC interpretation when using bnlearn: higher values are 
better). We applied bootstrapping to our data which involved learning a 
set of 500 (network) structures and building the average DAG/structure 
by setting a threshold (between 0 and 1). The threshold represents the 
minimum proportion of runs in which a particular relationship must 
appear for it to be included in the final average network. We identified 
an optimal threshold of 0.798, meaning that only relationships that 
appear in 79.8 % or more of the bootstrapping runs were included in the 
final model (Scutari & Nagarajan, 2013). The resulting structure was 
similar to the previous ones. Compared to the original model, there is 
one additional relationship between FC and BI (as also indicated by the 
GS algorithm), two additional relationships between FC, SN, and USE, 
and three further relationships between the exogenous constructs, 
namely from EE to PE, from EE to FC, and from PE to SN. 
Given its optimization for BIC, the HC algorithm showed a slightly 
superior performance in the BIC score compared to the GS algorithm, 
with only a marginal difference observed between the two models’ BIC 
scores. Evaluating the cross-validated RMSE, the GS and HC performed 
very similarly in predicting the two outcome variables BI and USE. 
Hence, both models are interesting alternative models to be evaluated 
from a theoretical perspective. 
4.2.2. Identify non-linearities and interactions using MARS and GAM 
To identify non-linearities and interactions between variables, we 
applied MARS and GAM. We referred to the GS model given in the 
previous section (Fig. 4, left).5 Hence, we used the following equations: 
BI = f (PE, EE, SN, FC) and USE = f (BI, FC). We fitted MARS models 
using the earth function integrated in the library caret in R (Kuhn, 2008). 
For model training, we combined the number of hinge functions and the 
degree of interaction between the hinge functions to identify the optimal 
combination of these two hyperparameters that minimize the cross- 
validated RMSE. The total number of hinge functions is based on the 
number of variables and the threshold values that mark the boundary 
between different regions of the input space. During training, the algo­
rithm applies a backward elimination of hinge functions (or terms) by 
looking at change in the generalized cross-validated (GCV) R2 as each 
new term is added to the model. A term is not retained if its inclusion 
results in less than 0.001 improvement in the GCV R2. In addition to 
tuning the number of hinge functions, we assessed potential interactions 
between different terms - using a maximum 3rd degree interaction as 
recommended in the literature (Boehmke & Greenwell, 2019). Table 6 
presents the MARS model summary, as well as the GCV R2, RMSE, and 
MAE. 
For BI (left), several non-intercept terms were retained, which were 
based on the four predictors (PE, EE, SN, FC) used to make the hinge 
terms. Similarly for USE (right), several non-intercept terms and two 
term-interactions, based on the two predictors BI and FC, were retained. 
For both models, the results suggest several non-linearities and an 
interaction effect (FC * BI) within specific input value ranges. MARS 
allows an estimation of the variables’ importance (how much each 
variable contributes to the model’s prediction performance) based on 
the impact on the GCV error as each predictor is added to the model. 
Table 6 reveals that EE, FC, and PE are the most important BI predictors 
and that BI is the most important USE predictor. 
As a complementary approach to MARS models, we also fitted GAM 
(Wood, 2006) for validation and further insight. The edf based on GAM 
(see Table 7) indicates that for SN and FC, degree 1 and, therefore, a 
linear relationship is sufficient. For PE, EE, and BI, an edf > 3.440, 
2.697, and 1.795, respectively, suggest possible non-linearities to cap­
ture the underlying patterns in the data. Fig. 5 presents the relationships 
we found between BI and EE, PE, SN, and FC, and between USE and BI 
and FC in partial dependency plots (PDP). The plots visualize the non- 
linearities indicated for BI on USE (edf > 1), and for PE and EE on BI 
(edf > 2). The remaining relationships are defined by a single poly­
nomial of degree 1, which are represented as straight lines. 
The plots also demonstrate considerable variability in the fit at the 
left outer ranges of the PE, EE, and BI predictors (indicated by the dotted 
lines outlining the 95 % confidence intervals). Notably, only 19 training 
observations fall in the category where PE < -5, EE < -3, and BI < -3, 
which results in a high standard error. Therefore, we used an additional 
test to assess the difference in deviance between a simple model incor­
porating a linear predictor function and the more complex model inte­
grating non-linear elements. The aim was to determine whether the non- 
linear model deviance had been significantly reduced. Such a finding 
would imply that the non-linear model aligns better with the data than 
the linear model. Table 8 reports the results of this test. For BI, Model 1 is 
a GAM that uses linear functions for all predictors, and Model 2 is a GAM 
that uses non-linearities of degree 3.440 for PE and 2.679 for EE. The 
significant test results indicate that Model 2 which includes the non- 
linearities, is preferred. Similarly, for USE, Model 1 represents the 
linear GAM, and Model 2 the GAM including the non-linearity we found 
earlier. Here, the linear model (Model 1) is preferred, as the non-linear 
function of BI does not decrease the deviance significantly (p > 0.05). 
Overall, the GAM applied to the GS model indicate non-linear re­
lationships for PE and EE. From visual inspection of the plots, the rela­
tionship between EE and BI seems optimally characterized by a 
quadratic function and a cubic function might be the best to represent 
the relationship between PE and BI. Additionally, the MARS models 
suggest an interaction effect between BI and FC in influencing USE. 
4.3. Step 3: Assess the theoretical plausibility of models and relationships 
identified 
Before initiating the next step, we needed to evaluate the theoretical 
plausibility of the explored relationships. A remarkable variety of arti­
cles has created different versions and extensions of the UTAUT building 
on different theoretical arguments. Blut et al. (2022) provide a synthesis 
in their meta-analysis. Based on this review, there are theoretical argu­
ments for a relationship between FC and BI as indicated by both the GS 
and HC algorithms. Conceptual thoughts building on the Theory of 
Planned Behavior indicate that FC can act similarly to perceived 
behavioral control and can thereby influence intention (Ajzen, 1991; 
Venkatesh et al., 2012). Additionally, there are alternative ideas to 
support the relationship between SN and USE. A first line of argument is 
related to the high correlation between habit (for which there is a pos­
itive association with USE) and SN (as given in Blut et al., 2022). In 
models that do not include habit, SN may absorb some of the direct 
impact habit has on USE (e.g., Cho et al., 2022a). A second line of 
argument is related to coercive pressure, which can potentially explain 
the direct relationship between SN and USE (e.g., Bozan et al., 2016). 
Thereby the relationships the HC algorithm indicates between SN and 
USE have some backing. However, we encountered challenges when 
seeking to substantiate the plausibility of all the relationships found 
between (initially exogenous) constructs in the HC model (e.g., between 
FC and SN). Hence, we suggest further tests of the more parsimonious GS 
model from a theoretical perspective.6 
Accordingly, considering the non-linearities and interactions indi­
cated by MARS and GAM, we noted that Blut et al. (2022) recommend 
assessing interactions between the UTAUT’s predictors, as well as the 
curvilinear effects that could, for instance, be based on optimal stimu­
lation level theory (Mittelstaedt et al., 1976). The interaction effect 
between BI and FC seemed intuitive, as facilitating conditions can 
reinforce an intention for use. The non-linearities visualized earlier did 
5 We refer to the GS model for illustrative purposes here, as we believe it is 
conceptually more intuitive than the HC model – see our argument later. 
6 We note that other conclusions can be drawn; the illustrated approach 
would be the same for the HC algorithm. 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
12
Fig. 4. Structures identified by the GS algorithm (left) and the HC algorithm (right). *Note: BIC calculations follow the bnlearn package, i.e., higher values are 
better. See Table 3 for details. 
Table 6 
MARS results on the GS model: Overview of coefficients and quality criteria.  
Model and predictors 
BI ¼ f (PE, EE, SN, FC) 
CV 
coefficients after pruning 
Model and predictors USE ¼ f (BI, FC) 
CV 
coefficients after pruning 
Intercept  
−1.525 
Intercept  
0.487 
h(EE- −1.41469)  
0.309 
h(1.1381-FC)  
−0.289 
h(-1.78202 - PE)  
−0.475 
h(BI- −0.393198)  
−3.239 
h(FC- −2.04857)  
0.260 
h(BI- −0.172881)  
8.531 
h(SN- −2.04081)  
0.200 
h(BI- −0.00440335)  
−13.275 
h(PE- −0.374069)  
0.233 
h(0.100529-BI)  
−0.604   
h(BI-0.100529)  
9.652   
h(BI-0.747055)  
−11.605   
h(BI-0.804747)  
11.239   
h(1.1381-FC) * h(0.478871-BI)  
0.098   
h(FC-1.1381) * h(0.100529-BI)  
4.010 
R2  
0.404 
R2  
0.877 
RMSE  
0.776 
RMSE  
0.244 
MAE  
0.589 
MAE  
0.693 
Note: The variable relative importance for BI = f (PE, EE, SN, FC) is: EE (100), FC (46.3), PE (22.0), SN (<1.0). Variable importance for USE = f (BI, FC) is: BI (100), FC 
(<1.0). The first predictor with a value of 100 means that it has the highest relative importance of all predictors in the model. 
Table 7 
GAM results on the GS model: edf values, significance and quality criteria.  
Model and predictors 
BI ¼ f (PE, EE, SN, FC) 
edf 
F-test 
Model and predictors USE ¼ f (BI, FC) 
edf 
F-test 
s(PE)  
3.440  
10.47**    
s(EE)  
2.679  
17.51**    
s(SN)  
1.000  
37.89**    
s(FC)  
1.000  
53.50** 
s(FC)  
1.000  
32.99**    
s(BI)  
1.795  
38.32** 
R2  
0.400  
R2  
0.227  
RMSE  
0.753  
RMSE  
0.870  
MAE  
0.575  
MAE  
0.687  
Note: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01. 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
13
not fully fit the ideas of an optimal level of stimulation; rather, they 
pointed to EE having a progressive effect on the behavioral intention and 
PE having an s-curve effect on BI. Hence, their theoretical plausibility 
could be debatable, and researchers might refrain from further testing 
these. We decided, for illustrative purposes, to offer the results of the 
further testing in PLS-SEM. 
4.4. Step 4: Create and compare alternative models identified in PLS-SEM 
In the final step, we transferred the new models identified into PLS- 
SEM and used PLS-SEM’s capabilities to compare them to the original 
UTAUT model as well as to the GSCA-improved UTAUT. Hence, we 
created the following alternative models in PLS-SEM (see Fig. 6): 
Alternative Model (AM) 1 is the improved UTAUT using the GS algo­
rithm, AM2 is the improved UTAUT using the HC algorithm, AM3 is the 
improved UTAUT using the GS algorithm including the identified 
interaction effect of BI and FC on USE, and finally, for illustrative pur­
poses, AM4 is the improved UTAUT using the GS algorithm including a 
cubic non-linear effect of PE on BI and a quadratic non-linear effect of EE 
on BI. We ran the PLS and PLSpredict algorithms on all models. In 
addition, we used the CVPAT procedure to compare the models along 
their predictive power (Sharma et al., 2023). 
All models performed better than the IA benchmark, and none per­
formed better than the LM benchmark, which means all models have 
predictive validity. Yet, as shown in Table 9, it is not strong predictive 
validity. We found the lowest RMSE for BI in the HC model (0.872) and 
Fig. 5. Partial dependency plots visualizing relationships found (including confidence intervals).  
Table 8 
Analysis of deviance.  
Model 
Resid. df 
Resid. Dev (RSS) 
df 
Deviance 
F 
BI = f (PE, EE, SN, FC)      
Model 1: 
BI ~ s(PE, 1) + s(EE, 1) + s(SN, 1) + s(FC, 1) 
716  
426.28    
Model 2: 
BI ~ s(PE, 3.440) + s(EE, 2.679) + s(SN, 1) + s(FC, 1) 
712  
418.12  
4.109  
8.166  
3.387** 
USE ¼ f (FC, BI)      
Model 1: 
USE ~ s(FC, 1) + s(BI, 1) 
719  
552.32    
Model 2: 
USE ~ s(FC, 1) + s(BI, 1.795) 
718  
550.31  
0.795  
2.014  
3.306 
Note: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01. 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
14
the lowest RMSE for USE in the GSCA-improved UTAUT (as proposed by 
Cho et al., 2022a). To compare and select models, the recommendation 
is that researchers compare the BIC scores. We found the lowest BIC for 
BI, with a score of −329.941, for the improved UTAUT using the GS 
algorithm, and we found the lowest BIC for USE, with a score of 
−211.418 for the improved UTAUT using the HC algorithm. As some of 
the BIC values were rather close, we complemented this procedure with 
the CVPAT test. Hence, we finally compared the models by focusing on 
the BI’s and USE’s prediction accuracy using the CVPAT test on the 
construct level for BI and USE (see Table 10). 
We tested the alternative (linear) models AM1 and AM2 that stem 
from the GS and HC algorithms against the original UTAUT. The results 
indicate that both linear models identified using BN performed signifi­
cantly better than the original UTAUT. Thus, the model structure 
identified by the GS algorithm outperformed the original model and is 
convincing with regards to its theoretical model structure. As we addi­
tionally tested the models versus the GSCA-improved UTAUT, we noted 
that the linear model based on the GS algorithm could not outperform 
the GSCA-improved UTAUT, but the structure identified by the HC al­
gorithm did (which provides food for thought in further understanding 
associations identified by the HC algorithm). The alternative models 
including the interaction effect and the non-linear relationships out­
performed the original UTAUT, but did not outperform the linear 
version of the GS-improved UTAUT (AM1). A pure metrics-guided 
assessment would point to the (linear) HC-improved UTAUT (AM2) as 
the best model. However, combined with the theoretical plausibility 
assessments we performed, we believe that the GSCA-improved UTAUT 
performs the best, followed by the GS-improved UTAUT. 
Fig. 6. The alternative models in PLS-SEM.  
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
15
Hence, in our illustrative example, the selected ML algorithms indi­
cate relevant improvements to the original UTAUT model, especially the 
new relationships identified via BN. Also, the illustrations demonstrate 
that identifying non-linearities and interactions using MARS and GAM 
can hold value for many further research applications – even while not 
yielding theoretically plausible improvements in our illustration. 
5. Discussion, conclusion, and implications 
In our study, we demonstrated the combined use of PLS-SEM and 
selected ML algorithms and offered a step-by-step guideline that in­
tegrates past approaches with new ideas to explore relationships and 
non-linearities, consolidating new capabilities in PLS-SEM. Thereby, we 
offer avenues for researchers to make relevant contributions to theory 
and research using the predictive capabilities of PLS-SEM, BN, MARS 
and GAM. We are confident that combining PLS-SEM with these ML 
algorithms can ultimately contribute to theorizing in business research 
by exploiting the two methods’ causal-predictive and causal-exploratory 
capabilities. As demonstrated, the combined approach could contribute 
first to identifying completely new relationships, improving existing 
conceptual models, and comparing and making choices between 
competing models. We note, however, that the methods are tools that 
assist the researcher in theorizing endeavors by offering ideas inferred 
from the data, but ultimately, do not construct the theory for the 
researcher (Provost & Fawcett, 2013; Kuhn & Johnson, 2013). 
Researchers often encounter alternative theoretical explanations for 
a phenomenon, which give rise to different models with different (or 
additional) antecedents and/or model relationships. PLS-SEM offers an 
element of exploration, in which the modeling is “[…] used in a more 
free-form fashion, supporting the purpose of capturing relationships that 
are perhaps unknown or at least less formally formulated” (Shmueli, 
2010, p. 297). This process can provide input to improve existing con­
ceptual models and to develop theoretical hypotheses that we build from 
the analyzed data. Also, such modeling can represent the inferences of 
the conducted research (see Jaeger & Halliday, 1998). However, tradi­
tional PLS-SEM algorithms do not examine all possible model 
configurations unless the researcher actively does so, which can be time- 
consuming and demanding. The SEM community has introduced the 
first approaches to enable a prediction-oriented search for models that 
demonstrate a high predictive accuracy (Cho et al., 2022a). We conclude 
that BN are particularly advantageous for this purpose due to their 
exploratory analysis capabilities without the need for predefined con­
ceptual models, while still permitting the integration of some a priori 
knowledge. 
BN are a complementary tool for generating new hypotheses and 
growing our insight in research situations characterized by weak or 
multiple theories, complex models with many potentially influencing 
factors, and interrelated factors and model contingencies. To some 
extent, BN can free models from one or all the researcher’s causal as­
sumptions based on human judgment, past research designs, and pop­
ular models. The capability of BN to highlight plausible alternative 
structures (Bollen & Pearl, 2013; Pearl, 2012a; Pearl, 2012b) and offer 
insight into new associations (Pearl, 2012a; Pearl, 2012b) is well- 
documented. Through the detection of both existent and non-existent 
relationships between the variables most substantiated by the data 
(Pearl, 1988; Elwert, 2013), BN can detect potential new causal mech­
anisms, that may lead to the development of new theoretical models or 
the refinement of existing models. This advantage seems to be exploited 
to a larger extent in other disciplines. We can, therefore, use BN algo­
rithms as a powerful exploratory technique that provides useful guid­
ance in building PLS-SEM models, mainly when there is little or tenuous 
theoretical support in constructing the model in business research. 
The capabilities of both PLS-SEM and ML can improve existing 
conceptual models by comparing the accuracy of models involving new 
relationships between variables, and by mediating, interacting, and 
integrating other non-linear effects. In PLS-SEM, these relationships can 
be tested by modeling alternative relationships between multiple vari­
ables in a path diagram. PLS-SEM can test non-linearities, interactions, 
and mediation effects (see Hair et al., 2018; Basco et al., 2022), but the 
researcher needs to know and manually introduce the higher-order 
terms and compare models involving these relationships, which can be 
a complex task. Instead, MARS and GAM could be used more actively to 
Table 9 
Model comparisons along predictive accuracy considerations.  
Model, 
constructs 
#paths 
(thereof: 
sign., *) 
Q2
predict 
RMSE 
R2  
BIC 
PLS-SEM loss-IA loss 
PLS-SEM loss-LM loss 
BENCHMARK MODELS 
Original UTAUT (Venkatesh et al., 2012) 
Overall 
5 (5)       
−0.247**  
0.051* 
BI 
3 (3)  
0.341  
0.815  
0.353   
−288.775  
−0.299**  
0.051* 
USE 
2 (2)  
0.129  
0.937  
0.250   
−189.367  
−0.209**  
0.050 
GSCA-improved UTAUT (Cho et al., 2022a) 
Overall 
9 (7)       
−0.294**  
0.018 
BI 
4 (4)  
0.380  
0.790  
0.394   
−329.766  
−0.332**  
−0.006 
USE 
5 (3)  
0.156  
0.922  
0.279   
−198.184  
−0.265**  
0.004 
ALTERNATIVE (LINEAR) MODELS 
AM1: GS-algorithm-improved UTAUT 
Overall 
6 (6)       
−0.273**  
0.025 
BI 
4 (4)  
0.380  
0.790  
0.394   
−329.941  
−0.332**  
0.018 
USE 
2 (2)  
0.138  
0.932  
0.253   
−191.579  
−0.229**  
0.030 
AM2: HC-algorithm-improved UTAUT 
Overall 
11 (11)       
−0.157**  
0.012 
BI 
4 (4)  
0.246  
0.872  
0.394   
−329.508  
−0.215**  
0.010 
USE 
3 (3)  
0.086  
0.960  
0.280   
−211.418  
−0.130**  
0.021 
ALTERNATIVE MODELS INCL. NON-LINEARITIES AND INTERACTIONS 
AM3: GS-algorithm- improved UTAUT, including interaction 
Overall 
7 (6)       
−0.273**  
0.025 
BI 
4 (4)  
0.380  
0.790  
0.394   
−329.941  
−0.332**  
0.018 
USE 
3 (2)  
0.138  
0.932  
0.258   
−189.777  
−0.229**  
0.030 
AM4: GS-algorithm-improved UTAUT, including non-linearities 
Overall 
9 (7)       
−0.266**  
0.033 
BI 
7 (5)  
0.377  
0.792  
0.402   
−320.003  
−0.329**  
0.022 
USE 
2 (2)  
0.131  
0.936  
0.252   
−190.425  
−0.219**  
0.041 
Note: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01. 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
16
identify non-linearities and interactions in existing models, and 
contribute to improving or refining such models, as has been done in 
most of the past hybrid PLS-SEM and ANN studies in business research. 
As discussed above, BN are a promising candidate to identify new as­
sociations in the form of mediation (Neapolitan & Jiang, 2007; Pearl, 
1988). We advocate that MARS and GAM are good approaches to 
identify and transparently represent non-linearities and interaction ef­
fects in existing structural models (Hastie et al., 2009a; James et al., 
2021) that have several advantages over and above ANN. Understanding 
when linear and non-linear responses occur can advance the ability to 
predict future outcomes in many fields (e.g., behavioral intention or 
usage) and can provide input for developing new theoretical mecha­
nisms. Understanding these non-linearities better by using the more 
transparent MARS and GAM has value in the further development of 
conceptual models. 
While previous studies that used ML before applying PLS-SEM rein­
tegrated their findings into structural or conceptual models, studies that 
used ML after applying PLS-SEM to identify non-linearities did not 
reintegrate their findings into PLS-SEM. This reintegration can, as we 
have demonstrated, be useful in profiting from the algorithm’s trans­
parency, and to compare models in the comprehensive and well- 
established PLS-SEM evaluation standards. Analyzing the BIC scores in 
PLS-SEM and, more importantly, investigating the more recently pro­
posed CVPAT test procedure provide excellent tools to identify models 
that demonstrate significantly better predictive accuracy than we had 
before (Liengaard et al., 2021; Sharma et al., 2023). Such analyses also 
assist in finding orientation between various predictive analytics to 
assess the predictability of an outcome (i.e., the distance between theory 
and practice). Thus, translating findings from ML back to PLS-SEM en­
ables further relevant evaluation of the models. Also, this enables the 
usage of PLS-SEM in follow-up studies using further complementary 
predictive approaches (such as agent-based modeling, Schubring et al., 
2016, to name but one option). 
In developing the step-by-step guideline, we faced several practical 
challenges that we would like to mention, which may offer implications 
for future research. First, there were two approaches to develop 
construct scores in previous studies combining PLS-SEM and ML: the 
universal structural modeling approach that seems to be less popular in 
business research probably due to the complexity of steps involved, and 
the more pragmatic approach of simply extracting the latent variable 
scores from PLS-SEM. The challenge with extracting the scores from PLS- 
SEM is that they rely on the conceptualized structural model relation­
ships. If these are to be validated in a more open exploratory way, this 
could produce a bias. We, therefore, proposed that we extract scores 
based on the factor weighting scheme applied to a full model. We invite 
future research to simulate the implications of this approach in com­
parison to other approaches used so far. Second, while re-integrating 
new model structures identified via BN was quite straightforward, 
translating non-linearities into PLS-SEM was at first more cumbersome. 
The ML algorithms pointed to several non-linearities. The finally pro­
posed combination of MARS and GAM including the integration of the 
deviance test gave us clearer recommendations on non-linearities that 
are worth being transferred to PLS-SEM. Still the non-linearities detec­
ted in ML demonstrated non-significant model improvements after re- 
integration into PLS-SEM. We found that both the interaction effect 
identified by the MARS algorithms, as well as the non-linear relation­
ships did not translate into significant path coefficients in PLS-SEM, at 
least not on a 5 % level. Recognizing MARS’s sensitivity in detecting 
non-linearities and interaction effects, particularly within specific input 
value ranges, and considering the limited size of our sample, which 
might have led to potential overfitting, it remains valuable to delve into 
the conditions under which non-linearities detected by ML models can 
translate into significant paths in PLS-SEM. 
We are confident that our study contributes to a knowledge transfer 
between researchers using ML algorithms and PLS-SEM and will enable 
business researchers familiar with PLS-SEM to profit from ML capabil­
ities to advance their conceptual models. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Nicole F. Richter: Conceptualization, Data curation, Writing - 
original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Investigation, 
Validation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Supervision, Resources, 
Project administration, Software. Ana Alina Tudoran: Conceptualiza­
tion, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, 
Visualization, Investigation, Validation, Formal analysis, Methodology, 
Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Software. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
We offer an appendix with code and will provide the file in a re­
pository (see the supplementary appendix for further details). 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2023.114453. 
Table 10 
CVPAT test on competing models.  
CVPAT compare construct: BI and USE 
Model 1 
loss 
Model 2 
loss 
Difference 
p-value 
Model 1 
Model 2 
ALTERNATIVE (LINEAR) MODELS 
Original UTAUT 
AM1: GS-algorithm-improved UTAUT  
0.849  
0.838  
0.010  
0.000 
Original UTAUT 
AM2: HC-algorithm-improved UTAUT  
0.849  
0.830  
0.019  
0.000 
GSCA-improved UTAUT 
AM1: GS-algorithm-improved UTAUT  
0.833  
0.838  
−0.006  
0.903 
GSCA-improved UTAUT 
AM2: HC-algorithm-improved UTAUT  
0.833  
0.830  
0.002  
0.006  
ALTERNATIVE MODELS INCL. NON-LINEARITIES AND INTERACTIONS 
Original UTAUT 
AM3: GS-algorithm-improved UTAUT, including interaction  
0.849  
0.838  
0.011  
0.001 
AM1: GS-algorithm-improved UTAUT 
AM3: GS-algorithm- improved UTAUT, including interaction  
0.838  
0.838  
0.000  
0.475 
GSCA-improved UTAUT 
AM3: GS-algorithm- improved UTAUT, including interaction  
0.833  
0.838  
−0.006  
0.882 
Original UTAUT 
AM4: GS-algorithm-improved UTAUT, including non-linearities  
0.849  
0.839  
0.010  
0.000 
AM1: GS-algorithm -improved UTAUT 
AM4: GS-algorithm-improved UTAUT, including non-linearities  
0.838  
0.839  
−0.000  
0.555 
GSCA-improved UTAUT 
AM4: GS-algorithm-improved UTAUT, including non-linearities  
0.833  
0.839  
−0.006  
0.895  
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
17
References 
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 50, 179–211. 
Al-Gahtani, S., Hubona, G. S., & Wang, J. (2007). Information technology (IT) in Saudi 
Arabia: Culture and the acceptance and use of IT. Information & Management, 44, 
681–691. 
Basco, R., Hair, J. F., Jr., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2022). Advancing family business 
research through modeling nonlinear relationships: Comparing PLS-SEM and 
multiple regression. Journal of Family Business Strategy, 13, Article 100457. 
Becker, J.-M., Cheah, J.-H., Gholamzade, R., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2023). PLS- 
SEM’s most wanted guidance. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality 
Management, 35, 321–346. 
Becker, J.-M., Ringle, C. M., Sarstedt, M., & V¨olckner, F. (2015). How collinearity affects 
mixture regression results. Marketing Letters, 26, 643–659. 
Blut, M., Chong, A. Y. L., Tsigna, Z., & Venkatesh, V. (2022). Meta-analysis of the unified 
theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT): Challenging its validity and 
charting a research agenda in the red ocean. Journal of the Association for Information 
Systems, 23, 13–95. 
Boehmke, B., & Greenwell, B. (2019). Hands-on machine learning with R. Chapman and 
Hall/CRC.  
Bollen, K. A., & Pearl, J. (2013). Eight Myths About Causality and Structural Equation 
Models. In S. L. Morgan (Ed.), Handbook of Causal Analysis for Social Research (pp. 
301–328). Dordrecht: Springer.  
Boto Ferreira, M., Costa Pinto, D., Maurer Herter, M., Soro, J., Vanneschi, L., Castelli, M., 
& Peres, F. (2021). Using artificial intelligence to overcome over-indebtedness and 
fight poverty. Journal of Business Research, 131, 411–425. 
Bouckaert, R. R. (2003). Choosing between two learning algorithms based on calibrated tests. 
Conference Proceedings: 20th International Conference on Machine Learning. 
Bozan, K., Parker, K., & Davey, B. (2016). A closer look at the social influence construct in 
the UTAUT model: An institutional theory based approach to investigate health IT 
adoption patterns of the elderly. Conference Proceedings: 49th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Koloa, HI (USA). 
Bruno, A., Martinelli, M., & Moroni, D. (2022). Exploring ensembling in deep learning. 
Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis, 32, 519–521. 
Buckler, F., & Hennig-Thurau, T. (2008). Identifying hidden structures in marketing’s 
structural models through Universal Structure Modeling: An explorative Bayesian 
Neural Network Complement to LISREL and PLS. Marketing - Journal of Research in 
Management, 4, 49–68. 
Burton, R. M., & Obel, B. (2011). Computational modeling for what-is, what-might-be, 
and what-should-be studies-and triangulation. Organization Science, 22, 1195–1202. 
Canhoto, A. I. (2021). Leveraging machine learning in the global fight against money 
laundering and terrorism financing: An affordances perspective. Journal of Business 
Research, 131, 441–452. 
Carvalho, E. C. A. d., Vissoci, J. R. N., Andrade, L. d., Machado, W. d. L., Paraiso, E. C., & 
Nievola, J. C. (2021). BNPA: An R package to learn path analysis input models from 
a data set semi-automatically using Bayesian networks. Knowledge-Based Systems, 
223, 107042. 
Cho, G., Hwang, H., Sarstedt, M., & Ringle, C. M. (2022a). A prediction-oriented 
specification search algorithm for generalized structured component analysis. 
Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 29, 611–619. 
Cho, G., Schlaegel, C., Hwang, H., Choi, Y., Sarstedt, M., & Ringle, C. M. (2022b). 
Integrated generalized structured component analysis: On the use of model fit 
criteria in international management research. Management International Review, 62, 
569–609. 
Contractor, F. J., Kundu, S. K., & Hsu, C.-C. (2003). A three-stage theory of international 
expansion: The link between multinationality and performance in the service sector. 
Journal of International Business Studies, 34, 5–18. 
Danks, N. P., Ray, S., & Shmueli, G. (2017). Evaluating the predictive performance of 
composites in PLS path modeling. Retrieved from Working Paper. https://ssrn. 
com/abstract=3055222. 
Díez-Mesa, F., de O˜na, R., & de O˜na, J. (2018). Bayesian networks and structural 
equation modelling to develop service quality models: Metro of Seville case study. 
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 118, 1–13. 
Druzdzel, M. J., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Causality in Bayesian Belief Networks. San 
Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.  
Elwert, F. (2013). Graphical causal models. In S. L. Morgan (Ed.), Handbook of Causal 
Analysis for Social Research (pp. 245–273). Dordrecht: Springer.  
Friedman, J. H. (1991). Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines. The Annals of Statistics, 
19, 1–67. 
Garbe, J.-N., & Richter, N. F. (2009). Causal analysis of the internationalization and 
performance relationship based on neural networks: Advocating the transnational 
structure. Journal of International Management, 15, 413–431. 
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning. Cambridge 
Massachusetts: MIT press.  
Gregor, S. (2006). The nature of theory in information systems. MIS Quarterly, 30, 
611–642. 
Guenther, P., Guenther, M., Ringle, C. M., Zaefarian, G., & Cartwright, S. (2023). 
Improving PLS-SEM use for business marketing research. Industrial Marketing 
Management, 111, 127–142. 
Gupta, S., & Kim, H. W. (2008). Linking structural equation modeling to Bayesian 
networks: Decision support for customer retention in virtual communities. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 190, 818–833. 
Hair, J. F., Hult, G. T. M., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2022). A Primer on Partial Least 
Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) (3 ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Hair, J. F., Hult, G. T. M., Ringle, C. M., Sarstedt, M., & Thiele, K. O. (2017). Mirror, 
mirror on the wall: A comparative evaluation of composite-based structural equation 
modeling methods. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 45, 616–632. 
Hair, J. F., Risher, J. J., Sarstedt, M., & Ringle, C. M. (2019). When to use and how to 
report the results of PLS-SEM. European Business Review, 31, 2–24. 
Hair, J. F., & Sarstedt, M. (2021). Data, measurement, and causal inferences in machine 
learning: Opportunities and challenges for marketing. Journal of Marketing Theory & 
Practice, 29, 65–77. 
Hair, J. F., Sarstedt, M., Ringle, C. M., & Gudergan, S. (2018). Advanced Issues in Partial 
Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, J. (2009a). Additive models, trees, and related 
methods. In T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, & J. Friedman (Eds.), The Elements of Statistical 
Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Springer.  
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, J. (2009b). The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data 
Mining, Inference, and Prediction (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Springer.  
Jaeger, R. G., & Halliday, R. R. (1998). On Confirmatory versus Exploratory Research. 
Herpetologica, 54, 64–66. 
James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2021). An introduction to statistical 
learning with applications in R (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Springer.  
J¨oreskog, K. G., & Wold, H. (1982). The ML and PLS Techniques for Modeling with Latent 
Variables: Historical and Comparative Aspects. In H. Wold, & K. G. J¨oreskog (Eds.), 
Systems Under Indirect Observation, Part I (pp. 263–270). Amsterdam: North-Holland.  
Kenett, R. S., Manzi, G., Rapaport, C., & Salini, S. (2022). Integrated analysis of 
behavioural and health COVID-19 data combining Bayesian Networks and Structural 
Equation Models. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 
19, 4859. 
Kohavi, R. (1995). A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and 
model selection. Conference Proceedings: 14th International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence. 
Koller, D., & Friedman, N. (2009). Probabilistic graphical models: Principles and techniques. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.  
Kuhn, M. (2008). Building Predictive Models in R Using the caret Package. Journal of 
Statistical Software, 28, 1–26. 
Kuhn, M., & Johnson, K. (2013). Applied Predictive Modeling. New York: Springer.  
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521, 436–444. 
Leong, L.-Y., Hew, T.-S., Ooi, K.-B., & Chong, A. Y. L. (2020). Predicting the antecedents 
of trust in social commerce: A hybrid structural equation modeling with neural 
network approach. Journal of Business Research, 110, 24–40. 
Liengaard, B. D., Sharma, P. N., Hult, G. T. M., Jensen, M. B., Sarstedt, M., Hair, J. F., & 
Ringle, C. M. (2021). Prediction: Coveted, yet forsaken? Introducing a cross- 
validated predictive ability test in Partial Least Squares Path modeling. Decision 
Sciences, 52, 362–392. 
Liew, B. X. W., Palacios-Ce˜na, M., Scutari, M., Fuensalida-Novo, S., Guerrero-Peral, A., 
Ord´as-Bandera, C., … Fern´andez-de-las-Pe˜nas, C. (2023). Path analysis models 
integrating psychological, psycho-physical and clinical variables in individuals with 
tension-type headache. The Journal of Pain, 24, 426–436. 
Lo, P.-S., Dwivedi, Y. K., Tan, G.-W.-H., Ooi, K.-B., Aw, E.-C.-X., & Metri, B. (2022). Why 
do consumers buy impulsively during live streaming? A deep learning-based dual 
stage SEM-ANN analysis. Journal of Business Research, 147, 325–337. 
Loh, X. M., Lee, V. H., & Leong, L. Y. (2022). Mobile-lizing continuance intention with 
the mobile expectation-confirmation model: An SEM-ANN-NCA approach. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 205. 
MacKay, D. J. C. (2003). Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Mandhani, J., Nayak, J. K., & Parida, M. (2020). Interrelationships among service quality 
factors of Metro Rail Transit System: An integrated Bayesian networks and PLS-SEM 
approach. Transportation Research Part A, 140, 320–336. 
Margaritis, D. (2003). Learning Bayesian network model structure from data. (Doctor of 
Philosophy Doctoral thesis). Carnegie-Mellon University. 
McQuarrie, A. D. R., & Tsai, C.-L. (1998). Regression and time series model selection. 
Singapore City. 
Mittelstaedt, R. A., Grossbart, S. L., Curtis, W. W., & Devere, S. P. (1976). Optimal 
stimulation level and the adoption decision process. Journal of Consumer Research, 3, 
84–94. 
Neapolitan, R. E. (2003). Learning Bayesian Networks. Prentice-Hall Inc.  
Neapolitan, R. E., & Jiang, X. (2007). Probabilistic methods for financial and marketing 
informatics. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.  
Nielsen, B. B., Welch, C., Chidlow, A., Miller, S. R., Aguzzoli, R., Gardner, E., … 
Pegoraro, D. (2020). Fifty years of methodological trends in JIBS: Why future IB 
research needs more triangulation. Journal of International Business Studies, 51, 
1478–1499. 
Ooi, K. B., Lee, V. H., Tan, G. W. H., Hew, T. S., & Hew, J. J. (2018). Cloud computing in 
manufacturing: The next industrial revolution in Malaysia? Expert Systems with 
Applications, 93, 376–394. 
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible inference. 
San Francisco (CA): Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.  
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference, (Vol. 64):. Cambridge 
University Press.  
Pearl, J. (2012b). Robustness of causal claims. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.4173. 
Pearl, J. (2012a). The causal foundations of structural equation modeling. In R. H. Hoyle 
(Ed.), Handbook of structural equation modeling (pp. 68–91). New York: Guilfold 
Press.  
Provost, F., & Fawcett, T. (2013). Data Science for Business: What you need to know about 
data mining and data-analytic thinking. O’Reilly Media Inc.  
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


Journal of Business Research 173 (2024) 114453
18
Rau, M. A., & Scheines, R. (2012). Searching for variables and models to investigate 
mediators of learning from multiple representations. Chania, Greece: Educational Data 
Mining.  
Ray, A., Bala, P. K., & Rana, N. P. (2021). Exploring the drivers of customers’ brand 
attitudes of online travel agency services: A text-mining based approach. Journal of 
Business Research, 128, 391–404. 
Refaeilzadeh, P., Tang, L., & Liu, H. (2009). Cross-validation. Encyclopedia of Databases 
Systems, 5, 532–538. 
Richter, N. F. (2007). Intra-regional sales and the internationalization and performance 
relationship. In A. M. Rugman (Ed.), Research in Global Strategic Management (Vol. 
13, pp. 359–381). Amsterdam: Elsevier.  
Richter, N. F., Cepeda, G., Rold´an, J. L., & Ringle, C. M. (2016a). European management 
research using partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) 
(editorial). European Management Journal, 34, 589–597. 
Richter, N. F., Hauff, S., Gudergan, S. P., & Ringle, C. M. (2022). The use of partial least 
squares structural equation modeling and complementary methods in international 
management research. Management International Review, 62, 449–470. 
Richter, N. F., Sinkovics, R. R., Ringle, C. M., & Schlaegel, C. (2016b). A critical look at 
the use of SEM in International Business research. International Marketing Review, 33, 
376–404. 
Rigdon, E. E., Becker, J.-M., & Sarstedt, M. (2019). Parceling cannot reduce factor 
indeterminacy in factor analysis: A research note. Psychometrika, 84, 772–780. 
Rigdon, E. E., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2010). Structural modeling of heterogeneous 
data with partial least squares. In N. K. Malhotra (Ed.), Review of Marketing Research 
(Vol. 7, pp. 255–296). Armonk: Sharpe.  
Ringle, C. M., Sarstedt, M., Sinkovics, N., & Sinkovics, R. R. (2023). A perspective on 
using partial least squares structural equation modeling in data articles. Data in Brief, 
48, Article 109074. 
Ringle, C. M., Wende, S., & Becker, J.-M. (2022). SmartPLS 4. Oststeinbek: SmartPLS: 
Retrieved from: www.smartpls.com. 
Sachan, S., Yang, J. B., Xu, D. L., Benavides, D. E., & Li, Y. (2020). An explainable AI 
decision-support-system to automate loan underwriting. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 144, Article 113100. 
Sanchez-Franco, M. J., Cepeda-Carrion, G., & Roldan, J. L. (2019). Understanding 
relationship quality in hospitality services A study based on text analytics and partial 
least squares. Internet Research, 29, 478–503. 
S´anchez-Franco, M. J., Navarro-García, A., & Rond´an-Catalu˜na, F. J. (2019). A naive 
Bayes strategy for classifying customer satisfaction: A study based on online reviews 
of hospitality services. Journal of Business Research, 101, 499–506. 
Sarstedt, M., Hair, J. F., Pick, M., Liengaard, B. D., Radomir, L., & Ringle, C. M. (2022a). 
Progress in partial least squares structural equation modeling use in marketing 
research in the last decade. Psychology & Marketing, 39, 1035–1064. 
Sarstedt, M., Hair, J. F., & Ringle, C. M. (2023). “PLS-SEM: Indeed a silver bullet” - 
retrospective observations and recent advances. Journal of Marketing Theory & 
Practice, 31, 261–275. 
Sarstedt, M., Radomir, L., Moisescu, O. I., & Ringle, C. M. (2022b). Latent class analysis 
in PLS-SEM: A review and recommendations for future applications. Journal of 
Business Research, 138, 398–407. 
Sarstedt, M., Ringle, C. M., Cheah, J.-H., Ting, H., Moisescu, O. I., & Radomir, L. (2019). 
Structural model robustness checks in PLS-SEM. Tourism Economics, 26, 531–554. 
Sarstedt, M., Ringle, C. M., & Hair, J. F. (2022c). Partial Least Squares Structural 
Equation Modeling. In C. Homburg, M. Klarmann, & A. E. Vomberg (Eds.), Handbook 
of Market Research (pp. 587–632). Cham: Springer.  
Schubring, S., Lorscheid, I., Meyer, M., & Ringle, C. M. (2016). The PLS agent: Predictive 
modeling with PLS-SEM and agent-based simulation. Journal of Business Research, 69, 
4606–4612. 
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimensions of a model. The Annals of Statistic, 6, 
461–464. 
Scutari, M. (2007). The bnlearn Package - Bayesian network structure learning. Retrieved 
from http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/bnlearn/bnlearn.pdf. 
Scutari, M., & Denis, J. B. (2021). Bayesian networks: With examples in R. Chapman and 
Hall/CRC.  
Scutari, M., & Nagarajan, R. (2013). On Identifying Significant Edges in Graphical 
Models of Molecular Networks. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 57, 207–217. 
Sener, A., Barut, M., Oztekin, A., Avcilar, M. Y., & Yildirim, M. B. (2019). The role of 
information usage in a retail supply chain: A causal data mining and analytical 
modeling approach. Journal of Business Research, 99, 87–104. 
Sharma, P. N., Liengaard, B., Hair, J. F., Sarstedt, M., & Ringle, C. M. (2023). Predictive 
model assessment and selection in composite-based modeling using PLS-SEM: 
Extensions and guidelines for using CVPAT. European Journal of Marketing, 57, 
1662–1677. 
Sharma, P. N., Shmueli, G., Sarstedt, M., Danks, N., & Ray, S. (2021). Prediction-oriented 
model selection in partial least squares path modeling. Decision Sciences, 52, 
535–538. 
Shmueli, G. (2010). To explain or to predict? Statistical Science, 25, 289–310. 
Shmueli, G., & Koppius, O. R. (2011). Predictive analytics in information systems 
research. MIS Quarterly, 35, 553–572. 
Shmueli, G., Ray, S., Velasquez Estrada, J. M., & Chatla, S. B. (2016). The elephant in the 
room: Evaluating the predictive performance of PLS models. Journal of Business 
Research, 69, 4552–4564. 
Shmueli, G., Sarstedt, M., Hair, J. F., Cheah, J., Ting, H., Vaithilingam, S., & Ringle, C. M. 
(2019). Predictive Model Assessment in PLS-SEM: Guidelines for Using PLSpredict. 
European Journal of Marketing, 53, 2322–2347. 
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C. N., Scheines, R., & Heckerman, D. (2000). Causation, prediction, 
and search. MIT press.  
Srivastava, A., Chockalingam, S. P., & Aluru, S. (2023). A Parallel Framework for 
Constraint-Based Bayesian Network Learning via Markov Blanket Discovery. IEEE 
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 34, 1699–1715. 
Torgo, L. (2017). Data mining with R: Learning with case studies ((2nd Ed. ed.):). Chapman 
and Hall/CRC.  
Tsamardinos, I., Aliferis, C. F., & Statnikov, A. (2003). Time and sample efficient 
discovery of Markov blankets and direct causal relations. Conference Proceedings: 
Ninth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 
Tudoran, A. A. (2022). A machine learning approach to identifying decision-making 
styles for managing customer relationships. Electronic Markets, 32, 351–374. 
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of 
information technology: Toward a unified view. MIS Quarterly, 27, 425–478. 
Venkatesh, V., Thong, J. Y. L., & Xu, X. (2012). Consumer acceptance and use of 
information technology: Extending the unified theory of acceptance and use of 
technology. MIS Quarterly, 36, 157–178. 
Wood, S. (2006). Generalized additive models: An introduction with R. Chapman and Hall/ 
CRC.  
Wood, S. (2022). Package ‘mgcv’. R package version, 1, 729. 
Yaramakala, S., & Margaritis, D. (2005). Speculative Markov blanket discovery for 
optimal feature selection. In Conference Proceedings: Fifth IEEE International 
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM (p. 05).). 
Nicole Franziska Richter is a Full Professor of International Business at the University of 
Southern Denmark. Her research focuses on strategic and international management with 
a special emphasis on cross-cultural aspects. Her research has a quantitative orientation 
and she is one of the leading experts in the field of PLS-SEM and an ambassador for 
necessary condition analysis (NCA). Her publications have appeared in journals, such as 
Journal of World Business, Journal of International Management, International Business 
Review, Journal of Business Research, and Long Range Planning. Nicole co-authored the 
German version of the textbook on PLS-SEM and regularly publishes articles applying PLS- 
SEM. She also published research using neural networks. Nicole is the editor in chief at the 
European Journal of International Management and an editorial review board member at 
the Journal of International Business Studies and the Journal of International Manage­
ment. Moreover, she is the national representative Denmark for the European Academy of 
Management. More information about Dr. Richter: https://portal.findresearcher.sdu.dk/ 
en/persons/nicole 
Ana Alina Tudoran is an Associate Professor in Consumer Science and Data Management 
for Business Intelligence at Aarhus University, Department of Economics and Business 
Economics, Denmark. Her research focuses on explaining and predicting consumer 
behavior, causal inference with latent structures, and machine learning techniques as a 
modern tool for professionals to use in developing decision support systems. Her publi­
cations have appeared in respected scholarly journals such as International Business Re­
view, Internet Research, International Marketing Review, Electronic Markets, Journal of 
Consumer Behavior, Psychology & Marketing, and European Journal of Marketing. Ana is 
the leader of the Business Intelligence Group (BIG) at Aarhus University. BIG develops in- 
depth research in the field of business intelligence incorporating management and mar­
keting science, information systems and computer science, as well as organizational and 
behavioral methodologies, with a primary emphasis on its practical significance for 
managers, organizations, and society. 
More information about Dr. Tudoran: https://pure.au.dk/portal/da/persons/ana- 
alina-tudoran(93b35ffe-1665-455b-8cba-84968e11e871).html 
N.F. Richter and A.A. Tudoran                                                                                                                                                                                                              


