# 8. 연구논문_Impact of Digital Assistant Attributes on Millennials’ Purchasing Intentions A Multi‑Group Analysis using PLS‑SEM, Artifcial Neural Network and fsQCA

---
**Source:** [[8. 연구논문_Impact of Digital Assistant Attributes on Millennials’ Purchasing Intentions A Multi‑Group Analysis using PLS‑SEM, Artifcial Neural Network and fsQCA.pdf]]
**Category:** #mba #ai
**Imported:** 2026-03-05

Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-022-10339-5
Impact of Digital Assistant Attributes on Millennials’ Purchasing 
Intentions: A Multi‑Group Analysis using PLS‑SEM, Artificial Neural 
Network and fsQCA
Manu Sharma1,2 · Sudhanshu Joshi3,4 · Sunil Luthra5   · Anil Kumar6
Accepted: 1 September 2022 / Published online: 23 September 2022 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022
Abstract
The rising population of millennials, coupled with Digital Assistants (DA) and online purchasing trends among consumers 
have gained increasing attention by global marketers. The study evaluates the influence of DA attributes on the purchasing 
intention (PUI) of millennials. A combined approach of PLS-SEM, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Fuzzy-set Qualita-
tive Comparative Analysis (fsQCA) is used to predict the PUI of 345 millennials. Also, multi-group analysis is employed to 
uncover the influence of gender on the relationship between PUI and DA attributes. The findings suggest that DA attributes 
may amplify purchasing intention among millennials, especially through perceived interactivity and anthropomorphism. 
Further, the moderating role of gender was found significant on the inter-relationship of perceived interactivity and PUI. 
This research is a pioneer study in the area of artificial intelligence, conversational commerce, DA and AI-powered chatbots. 
This study will help marketers and practitioners to predict millennial purchasing intentions. An evaluation of this paper may 
help them to foster immersive and effective engagement through DA.
Keywords  Artificial intelligence · Conversational commerce · Chatbots · Millennials · Customer purchase · Interactivity · 
Artificial neural network
1  Introduction
Conversational commerce (CC) is emerging as a strong 
communication method to enhance online purchasing. It 
is a concept that describes how customers move through 
the purchase process using natural language (Balakrishnan 
& Dwivedi, 2021; Mayer & Harrison, 2019). This can be 
through web-based chatbots, voice assistants or artificial 
intelligence (AI) empowered chatbots. The term CC was 
introduced in 2016 and is recognised throughout the digi-
tal sector (Messina, 2016). The introduction of the Amazon 
Echo smart speaker in 2014 and Alexa has revolutionised the 
retail industry and unlocked the potential of natural language 
processing. Since then, the industry has conducted a range 
of experiments that have opened up opportunities for new 
markets (McLean et al., 2021).
Through time, customers have become more comfortable 
with the digital assistant (DA) and now expect more person-
alised content and offers for their online purchases (Canziani 
& MacSween, 2021). The term DA is used interchangeably 
with voice assistant, AI enabled chatbot and chatbot assis-
tant. However, “Digital Assistant (DA)” is an umbrella term 
 *	 Sunil Luthra 
	
sunilluthra1977@gmail.com
	
Manu Sharma 
	
manu.sharma@geu.ac.in
	
Sudhanshu Joshi 
	
sudhanshujoshi@doonuniversity.ac.in; 
sudhanshu.joshi@uts.edu.au
	
Anil Kumar 
	
a.kumar@londonmet.ac.uk
1	
Graphic Era Deemed to Be University, Dehradun, India
2	
Guildhall School of Business and Law, London Metropolitan 
University, London, UK
3	
Operations and Supply Chain Management Research 
Laboratory, School of Management, Doon University, 
Dehradun 248001, Uttarakhand, India
4	
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute (AAII), Faculty 
of Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney, 
Ultimo, Australia
5	
Ch. Ranbir Singh State Institute of Engineering & 
Technology (CRSSIET), Jhajjar 124103, Haryana, India
6	
Guildhall School of Business and Law, London Metropolitan 
University, London, UK


944
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
that includes voice assistant, AI enabled chatbot and chat-
bot assistant (Pantano & Pizzi, 2020; Ramadan, 2021). DAs 
primarily integrate AI-enabled chatbots that interact with 
customers using natural language processing and are much 
more than AI pilots; they are developing and improving con-
siderably year by year. The main strength of the DA is the AI 
application without human interference that can reduce the 
churn rate of customers (Wilson & Daugherty, 2018). Due to 
its enhanced acceptability and potential, marketers use DA 
to augment customer journeys and engagements. With the 
use of DA, consumers buy FMCG (fast moving consumer 
goods), make travel bookings, purchase books etc.; exam-
ples include Oyo Rooms who use a chat enabled interface 
to search and book hotels; HDFC Bank has an insurance 
chatbot to provide financial advice while Domino’s has an 
intelligent chatbot on Facebook Messenger for ordering 
pizza (Huang & Rust, 2021).
The contribution of DA and conversational commerce 
is evident in the current scenario but studies are rare in 
exploring its potential conceptually and empirically (Bal-
akrishnan & Dwivedi, 2021). AI and data analytics are now 
an essential part of human lifestyle that cannot be ignored 
(Gupta et al., 2018; Porra et al., 2020). Based on AI algo-
rithms, DAs are deployed to optimise performance output. 
Currently, the presence of DA becomes significant in the 
digital environment where customers can access products 
via multiple touch points and expect a seamless experience. 
Based on customer preference, content personalisation is 
also provided through DA (McLean et al., 2021).
Throughout the last two years, COVID-19 has impacted 
markets and driven drastic changes in consumer behaviour. 
With less manpower, flexible hours and higher usage of the 
online marketplace, organisations have shifted their focus 
on DAs to fulfil order management, inquiry handling, per-
sonalised content, omni channels and technical assistance. 
Therefore, organisations are now more inclined towards DA 
enabled customer support services where customers tend 
to make online purchases based on the recommendations 
and advice offered (Shankar et al., 2021). With AI enabled 
technological support, customer purchase intention can be 
predicted with appropriate recommendations made, based 
on the past activities of a consumer using machine learning 
and AI algorithms (Choudrie et al., 2021). This increases 
the probability of a customer making a purchase. However, 
current literature is limited to examining the customer’s out-
look towards DAs. Many studies have looked at only the 
technological adoption of the DA. The adoption of DA on 
its own does not offer the answer; rather, we need to explore 
what traits of DA drive an individual to initiate a purchase 
intention (Zhong et al., 2021).
The educated, younger and healthier populations (mil-
lennials) of emerging economies are acting as fuel for a 
substantial increase in goods and services consumption 
and consequently, expenditure on online purchasing (Patwa 
et al., 2021). Spending by consumers (millennials) in these 
economies is projected to be higher than in developed 
nations. The role of the internet and e-commerce platforms 
is very significant in millennials’ attitudes towards purchas-
ing. It has been found that 43% of urban internet users in 
emerging economies use information that they collect online 
to guide their buying (Kendall et al., 2020). The millenni-
als of emerging economies are not just chatting, posting, 
using social networking or downloading videos, they are 
exploring and buying products online. The rising numbers of 
smartphones available and the increase in omni channel mar-
keting have contributed greatly to online purchase actions. 
E-commerce through smartphones is highly significant in 
these markets. It accounts for more than 70% of online retail 
purchases in China (Cheong et al., 2020). Therefore, the 
DA becomes vitally important for organisations to grab the 
target market of millennials (Cui et al., 2021).
Among the BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India and China) econ-
omies, India has a higher number of internet users, mainly 
consisting of millennials. In terms of growth perspective, 
millennials in emerging economies represent an enormous 
opportunity (Cheong et al., 2020). With the change in buy-
ing patterns, customers now expect marketers and retailers 
to switch to more advanced and efficient media to facilitate 
their purchasing actions. Therefore, millennials and their 
purchase intentions require to be analysed so that the DA 
can serve them more effectively. To achieve this, the mil-
lennials’ choices, perception towards DA and their purchase 
intentions need to be linked and thoroughly investigated. 
The current study has developed from the gap stated above, 
explaining the need to understand the millennial purchase 
intention based on DA characteristics. There is momentum 
in exploring DA and its contribution to customer purchase 
decisions, yet no research has investigated it empirically 
or conceptually. Moreover, the future research directions 
suggested by Moriuchi (2019) support the need for further 
investigation into customer engagement through DAs from 
a commercial viewpoint.
The present study extends empirical research through 
Uncanny Valley Theory (UVT), social presence and The-
ory of Planned Behavior (TPB) integrating the DAs and 
their consequence on customer (millennials) buying inten-
tion. With the UVT contribution, this study provides an 
understanding of DAs and customer (millennial) intention 
towards them. Besides using this theory, this study identifies 
the three main functions of DAs—perceived anthropomor-
phism, social presence and perceived interactivity. These 
three functions are the building blocks of DAs. Further, the 
TPB theory extends the research and identifies the purchase 
intention of the customer and its relationship with DAs. 
Based on the gap discussed above, the current study raises 
the following questions.


945
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
RQ1: How do DA attributes influence the purchase inten-
tion (PUI) of customers (millennials)?
RQ2: Does gender moderate the inter-relationship 
between the DAs and purchase intention (PUI) of cus-
tomers (millennials)?
The study will impart significant inputs into conversa-
tional commerce, DA and purchase intention by answering 
the above-mentioned research questions. The results of the 
study enrich existing literature on the purchase intention and 
role of human-like machines. The study will also provide 
insights to improve performance of companies as well as 
future strategies to engage customers more appropriately. 
Besides the theoretical framework, the study proposes a 
hypothetical model based on UVT, social presence theory 
and Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB). Besides theoretic 
implications, this study is useful for decision makers to 
develop strategic plans for influencing millennial purchas-
ing intentions.
The present study has collected data from 345 millen-
nials, all with experience of purchasing using DAs. This 
research is a pioneer in the area of artificial intelligence, 
conversational commerce, DA, AI-powered chatbots and 
presents a novel model to measure the impact using PLS-
SEM, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Fuzzy-set Qual-
itative Comparative Analysis (fsQCA) methods. These are 
the most appropriate methods for predicting the model. The 
PLS-SEM achieves greater statistical power at all sample 
sizes, but particularly smaller sample sizes, compared to 
CB-SEM (Hair et al., 2019). The PLS-SEM characteristic 
of higher statistical is useful for exploratory research that 
examines less developed or developing theory (Hair et al., 
2019). The linear and non-linear relationships can be cap-
tured by ANN. While PLS-SEM offers the evaluation of 
pre-determined relationships that are anticipated to explain 
the dependent variable of interest, the fsQCA methodology 
permits assessment of several alternative causal recipes 
concurrently (Ragin, 2006). fsQCA examines how causal 
conditions (independent variables) combine into several 
configurations entailing equifinality, thus conducing to the 
same outcome (dependent variable) (Pappas et al., 2017). To 
a certain extent, it complements PLS-SEM results (Gelhard 
et al., 2016; Woodside, 2013). Lee et al. (2020a, b) proposed 
that single-stage PLS-SEM application might only capture 
the linear relationship within a research framework, and 
might be insufficient to predict complex decision-making 
processes. The other researchers have attempted to mitigate 
this constraint by performing a second-stage data analysis 
using fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA) 
and artificial neural network (ANN) (Hasan et al., 2022). 
Therefore, the current study has implemented a multi-stage 
PLS-SEM-ANN-fsQCA approach that enhances the accu-
racy of a non-linear and asymmetric relationship. Moreover, 
the role of gender through multi-group analysis is identified 
and its moderating effect on DAs and PUI is explored.
The organisation of the study is as follows:
Section 2 elaborates the theoretic background of the 
research study and hypothesis development. Section 3 
explicates the methods undertaken in detail. Section 4 dis-
cusses the results of the study. The research contributions 
and implications are presented in Section 5. Finally, Sec-
tion 6 states conclusions and suggests directions for future 
researches.
2  Theoretical Background
The foremost theory grounded on human responses to 
human-like machines is Uncanny Valley Theory (UVT), 
proposed by Mori (1970). This theory proposed that ini-
tially, humans react positively to a human-like machine to 
a certain extent but subsequently, these positive reactions 
turn into negative responses when the machine comes 
with imperfect human looks and behaviours (Ciechanow-
ski et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021a, b). The negative response 
generated can again become positive when human likeness 
becomes perfect, forming the valley-like chart of human 
response against human-like machines (Mori, 1970; Urgen 
et al., 2018). Past research has empirically proved that UVT 
confirms the positive–negative-positive sequence relation-
ship among the human response and human-like machines 
(Kätsyri et al., 2015). Ciechanowski et al., 2019 concluded 
that people prefer simpler text-based chatbots compared to 
animated avatars.
Previous studies on ‘technology humanness’ have inves-
tigated the association between the user’s understanding and 
the machine (Kamide et al., 2014). The user’s response var-
ies based on their view of social presence imparted by the 
machine (Lankton et al., 2015). A significant association 
is found between the perceived humanness of the device 
and the user’s trust and emotional reaction to the device 
that leads to its adoption. (Lankton et al., 2015). The other 
theory in context to a relationship with technology human-
ness includes the theory of social presence (Chattaraman 
et al., 2019). This theory suggested that a user’s perception 
of the machine is formed built on human warmness attrib-
utes of DA (Lankton et al., 2015). Another viewpoint lies 
with the human perceived personification of machines. In 
the past, human predisposition has been explored to per-
sonify acceptance, for instance, digital assistants including 
chatbots, voice-based chatbots and AI-based chatbots (Lee 
et al., 2020a). These devices are sometimes treated as a 
human companion, although the users actually know that the 
humanoid of the device are 100% realised through AI and 
NLP technologies (Mir et al., 2020). Previous literature sug-
gests that humans are more comfortable in interacting with 


946
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
intelligent agents that are able to mimic what humans do; the 
degree of personification is directly correlated to the level of 
satisfaction towards the machine (Hu et al., 2021; Purington 
et al., 2017).
Other research has utilized the TPB model for predict-
ing the behaviour or intention towards purchase. Few stud-
ies have shown the combination of other models with TPB, 
whereas others have incorporated critical factors into it 
(Ajzen, 1991).
The use of DAs provides appropriate information to 
customers that is likely to influence their purchase (Brill 
et al., 2019). Consumer attitude has been assessed using 
TAM and TPB models towards online platforms (Dedeke, 
2016); an online travel provider website was also evaluated 
(Ayeh et al., 2013). The current study extends UVT, TPB 
and social presence theory to explore the purchase intention 
towards DA.
2.1  Digital Assistant Attributes
DAs have several attributes, such as human-like interaction 
and rich quality of information. Their four main attributes 
are perceived anthropomorphism, perceived social pres-
ence, perceived interactivity and information quality (Bal-
akrishnan & Dwivedi, 2021; Bartneck et al., 2009). The cur-
rent study utilises these four functions of DAs in developing 
the research framework.
2.1.1  Perceived Anthropomorphism
The best way to influence social cues is by offering 
an anthropomorphic interface. With DAs, human-like 
attributes such as gestures, facial expressions, voice/speech 
can be achieved (Qiu & Benbasat, 2010). Previous research 
studies have utilised transformation in anthropomorphic 
interfaces to develop intelligent agent appearance and 
behaviour such as 2D or 3D, avatars or modulations 
in communications. E-commerce firms need to know 
how to use DAs that can influence customer perception 
through anthropomorphism (Araujo, 2018). The objective 
of DAs is viewed as social actors with the capability of 
processing attitudes similar to humans (Qiu & Benbasat, 
2009). It has been recognised that users perceive DAs as 
human-like personalities that utilise characteristics such as 
politeness in their interactions. The usage of DAs is not 
limited to human-like attributes, it can also predict a user’s 
loyalty (Sundar et al., 2016). Brahnam (2009) concluded 
that social acceptance is received from anthropomorphic 
attributes’ application as cues in DAs. DAs utilise voice 
and chat both to enhance the acceptability and likeability 
of anthropomorphic attributes. The trust generated in DAs 
due to anthropomorphism has been assessed in a research 
study conducted by Nordheim et al. (2019).
A research survey performed by Sheehan et al. (2020) 
assesses anthropomorphism the chatbots to explain the 
inter-relationship between perceived humanness and adop-
tion scores. Further, it suggests that unresolved errors were 
enough to decrease anthropomorphism and the acceptance 
intent. Moussawi et al. (2020) showed that perceived anthro-
pomorphism is the degree to which an agent is perceived as 
human-like. Their findings reveal that anthropomorphism 
is the substantial antecedent of DA adoption. Also, anthro-
pomorphism enhances the enjoyment of using a personal 
intelligent assistant without the lack in initial trust. Jang 
et al. (2021) investigated chatbot services from a mana-
gerial perspective to enhance the adoption of chatbots at 
organisational level. Based on the social response theory 
(Nass et al., 1994), several studies have shown how humans 
deploy social rules to DA designed on anthropomorphism 
characteristics. This study also regards anthropomorphism 
as a human like characteristic, behavioral pattern and show-
ing emotions towards non-human agents (Epley et al., 2007). 
However, limited studies are available on DAs’ anthropo-
morphic attributes, especially in the commercial context. 
Thus, the impact of anthropomorphism on PUI is measured 
in the current study.
2.1.2  Perceived Social Presence
Based on the communication theory, social presence states a 
degree of salience felt by an individual during an interaction 
with machines (Short et al., 1976). This function has been 
extensively used in the area of information system research 
to examine computer-mediated communication (Venkatesh 
& Johnson, 2002; Cyr et al., 2009). Social presence is a psy-
chosomatic link to a user one who visualises DAs as warm, 
personal and sociable (Srivastava & Chandra, 2018). From 
a social media perspective, social presence outcomes are 
positive as there is a sense of warmth in social networking 
sites that attracts and influences an individual (Algharabat 
& Rana, 2020; Idemudia et al., 2018). Also, this function 
signifies a sense of sociability which enhances trust, loy-
alty and usage intention in the environment of e-commerce 
(Leong et al., 2020). Based on social presence theory, while 
interacting to an anthropomorphized agent, humans may per-
ceive a social presence. This concept is useful in assessing 
users’ perceptions of individual contact with other users in 
a technology-mediated interaction (Qiu & Benbasat, 2009). 
According to this theory, perception of a user towards the 
machine is shaped on the human warmness attributes of DA 
(Lankton et al., 2015). Past studies have considered virtual 
agents and acknowledged social presence as an important 
concept that describes the feeling of being prominent. This is 
employed to define the quasi-social relationship between the 
DA and users. Also, it can evaluate user perceptions in rela-
tion to social traits (Qiu & Benbasat, 2009). This function 


947
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
is essential for enhancing those social interactions that may 
develop a connection and influence intention (Poncin et al., 
2017). Li et al. (2021a, b) showed a positive impact of social 
presence through virtual agents on the consumer’s intention 
to use.
2.1.3  Perceived Interactivity
Some studies have shown that interactivity has been a major 
attribute in influencing interpersonal attraction and satisfac-
tion (Lew et al., 2018; Oh & Sundar, 2015) with engage-
ment; behaviour and attitude formation in relation to health-
care has also been noted (Bellur & Sundar, 2017). A study 
conducted by Yang and Shen (2018) identified that perceived 
interactivity affected the user response in the form of attitude 
formation and behavioural intentions. Perceived interactivity 
is expressed as the view of reciprocal communication and 
perceived active control. It includes the ability to manage 
and control communication through a medium (Ischen et al., 
2020).
Previous studies show that the existence of perceived 
interactivity results into positive attitude formation (Ischen 
et al., 2020; Go & Sundar, 2019). Based on these research 
conclusions, we conclude that DAs possess interactivity 
attributes that may influence the customer’s intention to 
purchase. Thus, we propose that higher interactivity of DAs 
will lead to an influence on PUI. The impact of perceived 
interactivity on PUI will therefore be measured in the cur-
rent study.
2.1.4  Information Quality
DAs need to have a strong information database that will 
generate appropriate responses to users. Also, natural lan-
guage processing needs to convert human language to appro-
priate information while interacting with the user (Li et al., 
2021a, b). A study conducted by Kuligowska (2015) high-
lighted a chatbot’s ability to understand a human conversa-
tion as one of the most important parameters for evaluation. 
If the user feels that the information provided by the DA 
is understandable and appropriate, then the perception or 
intentions towards the purchase can be influenced. Li et al. 
(2021a) established the effect of the quality dimensions 
of chatbots: understandability, reliability, responsiveness, 
assurance and interactivity are important to the user’s post-
use conformation.
The example of Alexa is well known for its capabilities 
that showcase human-like attributes and deliver human 
experience rather than merely acting as a machine (Rama-
dan, 2021). In the current study, the research model postu-
lates the inter-relationships among the DA attributes and the 
customer presence. Based on this, conceptual framework is 
developed as exhibited in Fig. 1.
2.2  Hypotheses’ Development
Perceived anthropomorphism is the most widely investigated 
construct in artificial intelligence and intelligent agents 
(Ho & MacDorman, 2017). Past studies have deliberated 
about anthropomorphism based on UVT and suggested that 
human attributes could increase the user’s level of comfort 
in accessing and using it (Broadbent, 2017; Mori et al., 
2012). Research has also formulated that attitude forma-
tion might happen but there was no such evidence for this 
predisposition. Studies have also found that human-like 
attributes tend to stimulate technology-oriented interac-
tions and develop intentions (Fan et al., 2016). Human-like 
assistance can lead to inducing customers into purchasing or 
booking a service (Labroo et al., 2008). This impersonation 
also affects purchase intention. Payne et al. (2013) showed 
the influence of brand anthropomorphic personality on 
intention towards purchase. Some studies have shown that 
anthropomorphism can be stimulated by cues on web por-
tals and chatbots (Araujo, 2018). The chatbot has an addi-
tional benefit of anthropomorphism compared to a website 
because of its intelligent interaction (Chong et al., 2021). 
TPB specified that a positive attitude develops the behavioral 
intention (Ajzen, 1991). Studies conducted on e-commerce 
have shown support to TPB. Up to the present day, there 
are no studies that explain the role of DA attributes on the 
Fig. 1   Conceptual model
Conversational 
Commerce (CC) 
   Identification of digital 
assistant attributes 
UVT, Social presence & 
Theory of planned 
behaviour 
Intention to   purchase 
through digital assistant 


948
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
intention to purchase, especially in the context of millennial 
customers. The above research findings fall into line with 
the propositions from UVT that human-like attributes can 
enhance millennials’ intention to purchase a product using 
online platform through DAs. To measure the influence of 
PA, the following hypothesis is proposed.
H1(a): Perceived Anthropomorphism (PA) of DA posi-
tively affects the customer’s (millennials) Intention to 
Purchase (PUI).
It has to be noted that social presence and anthropomor-
phism are distinct attributes. The concept of anthropomor-
phism refers to human-like attributes whereas social pres-
ence (SP) infers that a medium is perceived as a real social 
interaction partner with low prominence on the technologi-
cal contribution (Araujo, 2018; Ischen et al., 2020). In DAs, 
the social presence will be higher compared to websites due 
to the actual interaction. From the social presence theory 
perspective, the construct of social presence that provides 
a sense of warmth and sociability that leads the customer 
to being influenced (Gefen & Straub, 2004). Previous stud-
ies on technology adoption have examined the relationship 
between the user’s comfortability with technology and the 
humanness of it (Brown, 2008; Pierce, 2009). A few studies 
have also assessed the perception of an individual based on 
the social presence of the device used. The theory of social 
presence is related to the sociable attribute of the device 
(Lankton et al., 2015). Findings from previous studies are 
related to the present study by proposing that customers 
are more influenced by human-like partner/conversations, 
warmth and sociability of the machines i.e. DAs. Thus, this 
study aims to identify the impact of SP on PUI through the 
following proposed hypothesis.
H1(b): Social Presence (SP) of digital assistants posi-
tively affects the customer’s (millennials) Intention to 
Purchase (PUI).
Some evidence supports interactivity as an important 
construct in measuring user response to smart or intelligent 
agents. The interactivity of smart devices develops the user’s 
positive attitude towards the device (Shin, 2019) DAs are 
known to be error-free and provide seamless interaction and 
conversation just like human agents. This perceived interac-
tivity has also shown positive responses such as satisfaction, 
engagement and behavioral intentions (Ischen et al., 2020). 
Based on the TPB, positive attitude may lead to behavioral 
intention, and hence this characteristic of DAs may create 
a positive response towards purchase intention among mil-
lennials. Based on the theoretical explanation of message 
interactivity, DAs’ attributes may influence perceived inter-
activity; thus, a proposed hypothesis is
H1(c): Perceived Interactivity (PI) of DAs positively 
affects the millennials’ Intention to Purchase (PUI).
A noteworthy relationship between information system 
quality and user positive response has been identified. A 
DA needs to have a strong information system or database 
that will allow it to generate the most suitable responses to 
users. The conversion of the human language to providing 
relevant information and query solving needs a strong, reli-
able information system. Thus, the quality of the DA needs 
to be measured. Several studies conducted on chatbots have 
shown a significant link between the user’s understandability 
and his reactions (Sugumaran et al., 2017). A study by Kuli-
gowska (2015) has shown the understandability of human 
conversation to be one of the most important constructs to 
evaluate the DA. In the case when the information given 
by the DA to the user is understandable, the performance 
outcome can be positive. Li et al. (2021a, b) measured the 
effect of quality dimensions of chatbots, also showing that 
users are satisfied with the quality of DAs. These findings 
have supported the current study towards a theoretical rela-
tionship among the variables undertaken in the context of 
millennials’ purchase intention. The following hypothesis is 
made to measure the effect of information quality on PUI.
H1(d): Information Quality (IQ) positively affects the 
customer’s (millennials) Intention to Purchase (PUI).
2.2.1  The Moderating Effect of Gender on Digital Assistants 
and Customer’s (Millennials) Intention to Purchase
There is an effect of gender in decision making processes 
proven by the study conducted by He and Freeman (2010) 
in the field of psychology where it was demonstrated 
as a cognitive filter. Based on the study conducted by 
Tobias-Mamina et al. (2021), gender has an influence on 
trustworthiness and attitude; they found behavioural intent 
to be stronger in female users, whereas PUI was stronger 
for male users. The study conducted by Balakrishnan and 
Dwivedi (2021) concluded that age and gender act as the 
confounding variables in conversational commerce; they 
also observed the insignificant relationship between age 
and gender with PUI through DA. Previous studies have 
shown the moderating effect of gender on perceived risk 
and continuance intention where males had a higher value 
than females (Martin & Phillips, 2017). Büyükdağ et al. 
(2020) disclosed that there is a significant role of gender 
and PUI in the context of price discounts. Park et al. (2021) 
showed the moderating effect of gender, age and income 
on the perception of luxury in explaining online consumer 
engagement and purchase intention. As can be seen, previous 
studies have shown different results for moderating variables 
including gender.


949
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
Therefore, the current study has conducted multi-group 
analysis to observe the effect of gender on PUI through the 
following hypotheses.
H2(a): Gender moderates the Perceived Anthropomor-
phism (PA) and customer’s (millennials) Intention to Pur-
chase (PUI) inter-relationship.
H2(b): Gender moderates the Perceived Interactivity (PI) 
and customer’s (millennials) Intention to Purchase (PUI) 
inter-relationship.
H2(c): Gender moderates the Social Presence (SP) and 
customer’s (millennials) Intention to Purchase (PUI) 
inter-relationship.
H2(d): Gender moderates the Information Quality (IQ) 
and customer’s (millennials) Intention to Purchase (PUI) 
inter-relationship.
On the basis of above discussion, the proposed model is 
shown in Fig. 2.
3  Methodology
The selection of methodology depends on the nature of 
data collection and research objectives. The method should 
be undertaken after considering the sample size, outliers 
and multivariate assumptions, normality, multi-collinearity 
etc. The current study has employed Partial Least Square 
(PLS-SEM) and ANN to predict the purchase intention of 
millennials. PLS-SEM is employed in the study as the sam-
ple size satisfies the 1:10 ratio (Hair et al., 2017). It is the 
most appropriate method for prediction purposes; it is not 
sensitive to sample size as compared to CB-SEM. All 20 
items are selected in the study due to factor loading values 
more than 0.70 (Hair et al., 2017). Following the research 
questions, for detection of both linear and non-linear rela-
tionships to uncover the predictive capacity of exogenous 
variables, ANN is used as this is the most suitable method 
(Hew et al., 2019). ANN employs artificial intelligence 
for generation of the solution based on the principle of the 
human brain. PLS is conducted using SMART PLS 3.0 with 
ANN analysis conducted using SPSS 25.0. fsQCA is applied 
to validate the results of PLS-SEM and ANN. The current 
study has undertaken the fsQCA method as it considers the 
outcome and predictor variables on a fuzzy scale rather than 
a dichotomous scale (Ragin, 2009).
3.1  Data Collection
A survey-based approach was utilised for data collection. 
An e-discussion among academia (marketing) experts and 
data scientists was conducted in phase one to assess the 
relevance of measures undertaken. A panel of nine experts 
was convened including two senior professors of the mar-
keting domain, three professionals from data science (all 
with experience of five + years) and four professionals from 
operations management. This phase was followed by a pilot 
study on 20 respondents in the second phase; all respond-
ents had long experience working with digital assistants. The 
Cronbach’s alpha values were calculated and two items with 
low values were modified to enhance clarity and appropri-
ateness. A final questionnaire was prepared and shared with 
respondents in the English language; this included measure-
ment scales and demographic questions such as education, 
gender, age and exposure to DAs etc. The constructs were 
undertaken from previous studies. The items of perceived 
Fig. 2   Proposed research model


950
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
anthropomorphism have been adapted (Qiu & Benbasat, 
2009); perceived interactivity (Ischen et al., 2020) and pur-
chase intention through DAs (Pantano & Viassone, 2015).
The questionnaire was developed on an established scale 
undertaken in previous studies (Bartneck et al., 2009; Pan-
tano & Viassone, 2015; Qiu & Benbasat, 2009) although 
items had been slightly changed to align with the research 
study. The items were measured on a Likert scale of 1–5. 
The questionnaire included two sections. In the first section, 
the research construct information was shared followed by a 
demographic description of respondents in the second sec-
tion. The current study involved millennials with prior expe-
rience of online purchasing through DA. These millennials 
were aware of DAs and the different categories available on 
e-commerce platforms. The sample was collected from India 
as it is one of the emerging economies to be expanded and 
boosted by a well-educated, younger and healthier popula-
tion with rising incomes and acting as fuel for a substantial 
increase in goods and services consumption. The spending 
by consumers (millennials) in these economies is projected 
to be more than in developed nations. India has a greater 
number of internet users among the 15–35 years of age 
group and thus a sample from this country is a good repre-
sentation of emerging economies. Details of the respondents 
are presented in Table 1.
3.2  Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
ANN utilises AI to generate a solution; it is appropriate for 
determining the predictive power of any bias. ANN employs 
neurons that are dispersed in multiple layers, gathered 
as input, output or hidden. Several types of ANN are 
present, but in feed forward, a back-propagation multilayer 
perceptron (MLP) method has been applied in the current 
study (Negnevitsky, 2011). A typical neural network has 
several hierarchical layers including on input, one or more 
hidden and one output layer. With one hidden layer, any 
continuous function can be represented whereas with two 
hidden layers, discontinuous functions can also be modelled 
(Negnevitsky, 2011). Each layer comprises of neurons which 
are connected to other neurons of the following layer and 
each connection is represented by synaptic weight.
The current study has utilised ANN to determine the 
predictive power of bias in the context of DA and intention 
to purchase among millennials. ANN has the advantage of 
capturing non-linear relationships to address the quality 
parameters and multivariate assumptions. SEM analysis 
oversimplifies the intricacies of the decision-making process 
while ANN is not recommended for hypotheses that test 
causal relationships. However, in terms of prediction 
accuracy, ANN provides better results. The importance of 
each exogenous construct was assessed using sensitivity 
analysis and further expressed as a percentage of the relative 
importance. The ANN model comprises of three layers: the 
input layer, the hidden layer and the output layer. The current 
study uses MLP-ANN using SPSS v.25 and includes three 
input variables and one output variable. The independent 
variables of PLS-SEM—IQ (Information Quality), PA 
(Perceived anthropomorphism), PI (Perceived interactivity) 
and SP (Perceived Social presence) are introduced as input 
neurons; Intention to Purchase (PUI) is regarded as an output 
neuron. The automated generation of hidden neurons (nodes) 
takes place and an activation function is used for both hidden 
and output layers. In addition, ten-fold cross-validations are 
used for prediction accuracy of the trained network. Previous 
studies have looked at the application of ANN models to 
resolve complex problems in the area of marketing (Liebana-
Cabanillas et al., 2017; Sharma & Sharma, 2019).
3.3  Fuzzy Set Qualitative Comparative Analysis 
(fsQCA)
fsQCA explains each combination of causal conditions 
and outcomes (Mattke et al., 2022; Papamitsiou et al., 
2020; Pappas, 2018; Pappas & Woodside, 2021; Ragin, 
2009). This method has been applied successfully in 
several contexts including information systems and 
marketing (Pappas, 2018; Pappas & Woodside, 2021). 
According to user’s guide of fsQCA (Ragin, 2009), data 
calibration, construction of truth table, and analysis of 
causal conditions are necessary steps in data analysis 
procedure. The fsQCA starts with calibration of causal 
factors and outcome variables into fuzzy sets with a range 
Table 1   Demographic profile of the sample
Categories
Frequency
Percentage
Gender
Male
232
67.3
Female
113
32.7
Age group
18 to 24 yrs
213
61.7
25 to 30 yrs
96
27.8
30 to yrs
36
10.4
Education
Undergraduate
44
12.8
Graduate
105
30.4
Postgraduate
98
28.4
Professional
98
28.4
Undergraduate
44
12.8
Purchase through 
e-commerce
Once in 15 days
55
15.9
Twice in 15 days
54
15.7
Once in a month
66
19.1
Twice a month
96
27.8
Once a week
74
21.4
Exposure to digital 
assistant
High
45
13.0
Medium
194
56.2
Low
106
30.7


951
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
of 0 and 1; 0 denotes non-membership and 1 denotes full 
membership. fsQCA undertakes metric scale data, although 
the causal conditions and outcomes could be represented 
as a single item. Hence, each construct is embodied by a 
single item which was computed by the arithmetic mean. 
The calibration of variables was conducted into sets using 
fsQCA software recommended by Ragin (2009) and Pappas 
and Woodside (2021). According to Ragin (2009), variables 
need to be transformed into calibrated sets using three 
substantively meaningful thresholds: full membership, full 
non-membership and a crossover point. This crossover point 
embodies the point of maximum ambiguity. Based on these 
breakpoints, all the remaining scores were calculated. The 
thresholds were taken as 5,3,1
The truth table calculated all the possible configurations 
that might occur, providing ­2 k rows, with k represents the 
number of outcome predictors, and each row represented 
every possible combination. While computation of all 
possible configurations, the frequency was also presented, 
while several lines had a frequency of zero indicating that 
none of the cases in the sample were explained by them. As 
the number of variables in an analysis increase, the number 
of possible configurations increases exponentially ­(2 k), thus 
the more variables the more combinations are likely to had 
a frequency of zero (Pappas & Woodside, 2021). In the next 
step, the truth table sorting by frequency and consistency 
was conducted. The threshold frequency was set to 1 and 
all combinations with smaller frequency are removed from 
further analysis. Once removing configurations with low 
frequency, the truth table was sorted by “raw consistency”. 
At this point a consistency threshold was set to 0.75. 
The lowest consistency values were 0.854436, 0.742686, 
0.670488. Proportional Reduction in Inconsistency 
(PRI) consistency scores should be high and close to raw 
consistency scores (e.g., 0.7), while configurations with 
PRI scores below 0.5 indicate significant inconsistency 
(Greckhamer et al., 2018). PRI consistency is used to avoid 
simultaneous subset relations of configurations in both the 
outcome and the absence of the outcome (i.e., negation). 
Symmetric (SYM) consistency was used to examine the 
presence and negation of the outcome and same consistency 
standard for both analyses (i.e., presence and its negation) 
(Pappas & Woodside, 2021). fsQCA computed three 
solutions namely, complex, parsimonious and intermediate. 
The truth tables are presented in Appendix (Figs. 6 and 7).
4  Results
In Fig.  3, the relationships among the perceived 
anthropomorphism, perceived interactivity, social presence, 
information quality and intention to purchase are investigated 
using PLS-SEM through SmartPLS3.0 software.
4.1  Measurement Model
With SMART PLS 3.0, the measurement model is developed 
and exhibited in Fig. 3. The Cronbach’s alpha, reliability, 
validity and fit indices are shown in the subsequent sections.
4.1.1  Reliability
The values obtained in the model are shown in Table 2. 
The reliability has been examined through Composite Reli-
ability (CR) and Cronbach’s alpha. From Table 2, the val-
ues of Cronbach’s alpha for the constructs are IQ = 0.849; 
PA = 0.834; 0.706; SP = 0.822; PUI = 0.855. For CR, the 
values are IQ = 0.899; PA = 0.900; PI = 0.837 l; SP = 0.894; 
PUI = 0.896. The values of each construct have a value 
greater than 0.70 (Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994) showing 
that the model is reliable.
4.1.2  Convergent Validity
This validity could be achieved when all the items load sig-
nificantly on their denominated latent variables (Hair et al., 
2012). This has been measured through factor loading and 
average variance extracted (AVE). Table 2 presents the val-
ues of factor loadings and AVE.
The CR values indicate that the objective has been 
achieved as it exceeds the threshold values values. CR > 0.60 
and values of AVE > 0.50 respectively (Fornell & Larcker, 
1981).
4.1.3  Discriminant Validity
Discriminant validity signifies the degree to which the 
latent variables are distinct from each other. This validity is 
obtained when the square root of AVE for each construct is 
greater than the correlations of all the other constructs (For-
nell & Larcker, 1981). Table 3 shows the values obtained for 
discriminant validity.
Table 3 indicates that validity is achieved when the non-
diagonal values (square root of AVE) are higher than the off-
diagonal values. Further, the Heterotrait monotrait (HTMT) 
ratio was also computed to confirm the discriminant validity 
issues and results indicating the fulfilment of the criteria; 
this satisfies the condition as the values are less than 0.90 
(Henseler et al., 2015) (Table 4).
4.1.4  Non‑Response and Common Method Bias (CMB)
Non-response bias test was conducted and showed no 
significant difference between respondents and non-
respondents. Two groups were formed; the first group was 
comprised of respondents who responded in the first two 
weeks with the second group comprised of respondents 


952
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
who responded in the last two weeks. For each construct, 
t-test comparisons were computed between group means; 
results indicated that no significant differences exist. 
Further, to control for CMB, the Harman single factor 
test was used and found that the majority of variance was 
not attributed to one factor. CMB arises due to a single 
source of data (Avolio et al., 1991). It undermines validity 
(MacKenzie & Podsakoff, 2012) and also has an effect 
on structural relationship (Kline, 2015). The two ways to 
minimise CMB are by procedural design and statistical 
control (Reio, 2010). The current study has employed the 
statistical control method using Harman’s one factor test to 
0.810 
PUI 
(0.563)
PA 
PA1 
PA2 
PA3 
SP 
SP1 
SP2 
SP3 
PI 
PI1 
PI2 
PI3 
IQ 
IQ1 
IQ2 
IQ3 
IQ4 
PUI1
PUI2
PUI3
PUI4
PUI5
0.257 
0.170 
0.420 
0.038 
0.752 
0.837 
0.849 
0.880
0.874 
0.801 
0.704 
0.888 
0.909 
0.777 
0.845 
0.898 
0.856 
0.834 
0.805 
0.752
0.774 
Fig. 3   Measurement model
Table 2   Cronbach’s Alpha, CR and AVE
IQ Information Quality, PA perceived Anthropomorphism, PI Per-
ceived Interactivity, SP Social presence, PUI Purchase intention
Cronbach's Alpha
rho_A
CR
AVE
IQ
0.849
0.852
0.899
0.690
PA
0.834
0.836
0.900
0.751
PI
0.706
0.722
0.837
0.634
SP
0.822
0.836
0.894
0.739
PUI
0.855
0.860
0.896
0.633
Table 3   Discriminant validity
IQ
PA
PI
PUI
SP
IQ
0.831
PA
0.227
0.867
PI
0.302
0.574
0.796
SP
0.252
0.623
0.687
0.796
PUI
0.171
0.687
0.637
0.62
0.86


953
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
verify CMB issue. Based on the results, it is observed that 
40.1 percent of the total variance was the largest variance 
explained. The results fulfil the condition as it shows less 
than 50 percent threshold (Fuller et al., 2016; Podsakoff 
et al., 2012). Also, the full-collinearity test was conducted; 
results obtained show values less than 3.3 (Kock, 2015), 
indicating the absence of CMB.
Table 5 presents VIF values; all are less than the thresh-
old value of 3.3 that indicates the absence of CMB in the 
model.
4.2  Structural Model
Table 6 presents the hypotheses results, showing that PA, 
PI and SP have a significant effect on PUI of millennials; 
PA → PUI (P-value < 0.05); SP → PUI (P-value < 0.05); 
PI → PUI (P-value < 0.05).
The results shows that IQ does not have a significant 
effect on PUI (P-value > 0.05). The cut-off value is 5% to 
determine the statistical significance.
4.3  Multi‑Group Analysis (MGA)
MGA using PLS is used to test a structural relationship. It 
evaluates the moderation effect on relationships. With multi-
group analysis, sub-samples within the total population are 
made. Two groups are made based on gender—female and 
male. Moderation is run in PLS-SEM using multi-group 
analysis with the effect measured on the inter-relationships 
between the DA attributes and millennials’ purchasing 
intention (see Table 7).
Table 4   HTMT ratio
IQ
PA
PI
PUI
SP
IQ
PA
0.271
PI
0.394
0.738
PUI
0.291
0.728
0.879
SP
0.201
0.816
0.836
0.733
Table 5   Collinearity stats
Outer
VIF
IQ1
2.126
IQ2
2.401
IQ3
2.517
IQ4
1.431
PA1
2.091
PA2
2.468
PA3
1.699
PI1
1.763
PI2
1.612
PI3
1.214
PU1
2.101
PU2
1.901
PU3
2.023
PU4
1.784
PU5
1.690
SP1
2.335
SP2
2.525
SP3
1.499
Table 6   Bootstrapping results 
for structural model
*** indicates p < 0.05; significant; IQ Information Quality, PA perceived Anthropomorphism, PI Perceived 
Interactivity, SP Social presence, PUI Purchase intention
Original 
Sample (O)
Sample 
Mean (M)
Standard Devia-
tion (STDEV)
t-Statistics 
(|O/STDEV|)
P Values
Significance
H1: PA—> PUI
0.257
0.257
0.055
4.705
0.000
***
H2: SP—> PUI
0.170
0.171
0.052
3.234
0.000
***
H3: PI—> PUI
0.420
0.420
0.049
8.495
0.000
***
H4: IQ—> PUI
0.038
0.041
0.037
1.025
0.306
Insignificant
Table 7   A multi-group analysis
*** indicates p < 0.05; significant; IQ Information Quality, PA perceived Anthropomorphism, PI Perceived 
Interactivity, SP Social presence, PUI Purchase intention
Path Coefficients-diff 
(female—male)
p-Value original 1-tailed 
(female vs male)
p-Value new 
(female vs male)
Significance
PA—> PUI
-0.028
0.605
0.790
Insignificant
PI—> PUI
0.0207
0.017
0.034
***
SP—> PUI
-0.095
0.813
0.374
Insignificant
IQ—> PUI
0.007
0.462
0.923
Insignificant


954
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
The results show that the hypotheses IQ—> PUI; 
PA—> PUI; SP—> PUI are found to be insignificant 
whereas PI—> PUI is significant. This proves that gender 
moderates the inter-relationship between PI and PUI as the 
p-value is significant.
4.4  Artificial Neural Network Validation
ANN was conducted to complement the PLS-SEM inves-
tigation as discussed in Section 3.2. ANN was conducted 
using MLP (multi-layer perceptron) in SPSS v. 25. In the 
current study, a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) feed-forward 
back propagation multilayer training algorithm with a hyper-
bolic tangent activation is employed. The study has utilised a 
six-fold cross-validation process where data was segmented 
into training and test data to avoid the issue of overfitting; 
data was divided into two parts (80% for training and 20% 
for testing) (Liebana-Cabanillas et al., 2017). This study has 
only one model in ANN. The significant reflective independ-
ent variables are undertaken as input neurons for the output 
neuron (dependent variable) in the ANN analysis. Figure 4 
shows the developed model. Also, the prediction results 
from ANN are more precise in comparison to the PLS-SEM 
method. Therefore, an integrated PLS-SEM-ANN approach 
explains the prediction model in a better way, consequently 
enhancing the robustness of the results. To validate the ANN 
findings, an accuracy measure, Root Mean Square Error 
(RMSE), has been used (Yadav et al., 2016). From Eqs. 1 
and 2, RMSEA is calculated where SSE indicates the sum 
of squared error; MSE is the mean squared prediction error.
The values of average RMSE lie between 0.4 to 0.5 for 
both the training and testing sets as shown in Fig. 5. The 
values of RMSE are lower than 0.5; hence it can be inter-
preted that ANN models are accurate, reliable and capture 
the relationships between predictors and outputs (Chong, 
2013). The RMSEA values for training and test data confirm 
that all the predictor variables have a significant effect on 
PUI. All values are less than 0.50 and near to each other; this 
shows that the model fit is accurate and reliable.
4.4.1  Sensitivity Analysis
Sensitivity analysis helps to compute normalised importance 
using the ratio of the relative importance of each input and 
expressed as a percentage (Ooi & Tan, 2016). This study 
determines the variations in the dependent variable with a 
change in independent variables. The computation is carried 
out by undertaking the average of importance of IQ, PA, PI 
and SP as independent variables and PUI as a dependent 
variable. The results obtained through sensitivity analysis 
are shown in Table 8.
(1)
MSE = [1∕n] x SSE
(2)
RMSEA = √
MSE
Fig. 4   ANN model


955
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
Results are based on the normalised relative importance (%) 
and shown as above in Table 8. Based on these results, PI is 
the most significant predictor of PUI (with 100% normalised 
relative importance) followed by PA, SP and IQ with 37%, 32% 
and 8% normalised relative importance respectively. The results 
of PLS, SEM and ANN are matched and support each other. 
With ANN analysis, it is validated that PI is the most influential 
variable as it has obtained the highest normalised importance 
ratio in comparison to others. The results of ANN match with 
PLS-SEM. The construct has a similar influence as seen in 
PLS-SEM. Thus, the model predicted in the study is reliable.
The study has employed fsQCA to measure the synergis-
tic impact of the multiple factors on an outcome. The steps 
of fsQCA have been applied including calibration, truth 
table construction and analysis of necessary conditions.
4.5  fsQCA Results
The fsQCA application has offered three solutions; complex 
solution, parsimonious and intermediate solution. The 
complex solution presented all the possible combinations 
of conditions when traditional logical operations are applied 
(Appendix, Fig. 8). The parsimonious solution presented the 
most important conditions which cannot be left out from 
any solution (Appendix, Fig. 9). Finally, the intermediate 
solution is obtained when performing counterfactual 
analysis on the complex and parsimonious solutions 
including only theoretically plausible counterfactuals. 
The intermediate solution has a higher consistency than 
the parsimonious (Appendix, Fig. 10) According to the 
findings of parsimonious solutions, PI, PA and SP are the 
core conditions for influencing PUI of the millennials. To 
clearly demonstrate the findings obtained from complex, 
intermediate and parsimonious solutions, the results are 
summarised in Table 9.
Three causal configurations that lead to PUI have con-
sistency more than 0.82, coverage values between 0.237 to 
0.748 and overall solution coverage more than 0.90. This 
shows that the model is informative. Path 1 suggests that 
when IQ is less, PUI can be influenced through PI. Path 2 
suggests that in the absence of SP, PUI can be influenced 
 
0.471
0.464
0.454
0.478
0.…
0.462
0.477
0.461
0.452
0.433
0.506
0.402
0.436
0.432
0.443
0.468
0.450
0.405
0.421
0.449
0.000
0.100
0.200
0.300
0.400
0.500
0.600
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
RMSE
ANNs
RMSE (Training)
(InT)
RMSE (Testing) (InT)
Fig. 5   RMSE values (training and test data)
Table 8   ANN model results
IQ Information Quality, PA Perceived Anthropomorphism, PI Per-
ceived Interactivity, SP Social presence, PUI Purchase intention
ANN models
IQ
PA
PI
SP
ANN1
0.00
0.44
1.00
0.41
ANN2
0.08
0.20
1.00
0.17
ANN3
0.08
0.44
1.00
0.21
ANN4
0.09
0.20
1.00
0.35
ANN5
0.01
0.34
1.00
0.30
ANN6
0.21
0.65
1.00
0.53
ANN7
0.01
0.33
1.00
0.20
ANN8
0.05
0.33
1.00
0.56
ANN9
0.10
0.36
1.00
0.15
ANN10
0.13
0.42
1.00
0.29
Mean
0.08
0.37
1.00
0.32
Normalized
8%
37%
100%
32%


956
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
by PA and PI. Path 3 indicates that PA and SP can lead to 
influence on PUI in the absence of IQ. In the presentation 
of findings shown in Table 9,
5  Discussion of Findings
The study has observed the effect of DA attributes on the 
PUI of millennials through a hypothesised model. The inves-
tigation included a purposive survey among 345 millenni-
als. A total of four hypotheses were formulated for model 1 
without any moderation effect and one hypothesis for model 
2 with gender moderation effect. Table 6 shows that apart 
from IQ, other attributes including PA, SP and PI have a 
significant effect on PUI. This study is novel in exploring the 
impact of PA on the PUI of millennials. The first hypothesis 
(H1: PA—> PUI; β = 0.275; p < 0.05; significant) indicates 
the positive influence of PA on the PUI of millennials. The 
study on millennial PUI is also dependent on the time spent 
on the internet and the acceptability of smart devices. In 
the past few years, the average time spent among Indian 
users has grown and due to the disruptive environment, 
there has been an increase in the usage of machines. The 
human–machine ratio has previously been a concern, but 
currently it is becoming a survival strategy for organisations. 
Intelligent agents have become an integral part of human 
lives. Thus, human-like attributes influence humans towards 
their attitude formation and intention for purchase actions.
The above research findings are in line with the UVT 
propositions that human-like attributes can enhance millen-
nials’ PUI on e-commerce sites through DAs. The second 
hypothesis (H2: SP- > PUI; β = 0.17; p < 0.05; significant) 
indicates the significant effect of SP on the PUI of mil-
lennials. SP is higher compared to website activity due to 
the actual interaction. A sense of warmth and sociability 
is generated, leading to influence on the customer. This is 
supported by the social presence theory that suggests the 
relationship of SP to services based on technology, including 
social media and chatbots (Poncin et al., 2017). Key findings 
from past studies suggest that a customer is highly influ-
enced by the human-like partner/conversations, warmth and 
sociability of machines. Li et al. (2021a, b) also showed a 
positive impact of social presence through virtual agents on 
the consumer’s intention to use. Social presence is essential 
for making a connection with the user to develop attitude 
formation and intention. The study aligns with other research 
(Balakrishnan & Dwivedi, 2021) that supports the opinion 
that humans have an inclination to become associated with 
anthropomorphic agents.
Other findings from the study show the positive 
relationship between the DA and interactivity, demonstrating 
the significant effect of PI on the PUI of millennials 
(H3:PI—> PUI; β = 0.420; p < 0.05; significant). This 
supports hypothesis 3. This aligns with previous studies 
that have highlighted the positive impact of the level of 
interactivity of smart devices on attitude towards the device 
(Shin et al., 2016). This construct has maximum effect on 
the PUI, showing that millennials perceive that DAs are 
efficient in interaction and can guide users in their purchase 
actions. The effect of PI has also shown a positive response 
on behavioural intentions in a past study conducted by 
Ischen et al. (2020). The findings of this study are supported 
by Yang and Shen (2018) who identified the perceived 
interactivity effect on the user response in the form of 
behavioural intentions. The effect of IQ on PUI is found 
to be insignificant (H4:IQ—> PUI; β = 0.038; p > 0.05; 
insignificant), thus rejecting the hypothesis. This shows a 
non-significance of information quality on the purchasing 
intention of millennials. As the information provided to the 
user is sometimes not appropriate or not relevant, there is no 
trigger to purchase. Information quality also has a problem 
of responsiveness and is low compared to human interaction. 
This finding is supported by Li et al. (2021a, b). The users 
may believe that DAs are not able to understand the problem 
in the appropriate way.
With multi-group analysis, the moderation effects of 
gender, shown in Table 7, show that, except for perceived 
interactivity, all other attributes are insignificant. The values 
of perceived anthropomorphism, perceived social presence 
and information quality are found to be non-significant, 
implying that all three attributes are not affected by gender. 
The results from PLS-SEM were validated by ANN; the 
results are shown in Table 7. Perceived interactivity, with 
a value of 100%, shows highest influence. This shows 
that millennials have an inclination towards interactivity 
involving DA; in addition, males have higher influence than 
females. The findings suggest that millennials perceive DA 
to be sensitive and interact like humans. This is because 
Table 9   fsQCA Results
black circle (●) indicates the presence of a condition; crossed-out cir-
cle ( ⊗) indicates the absence/negation whereas blank space denotes 
“do not care” condition
Solution
Configuration
1
2
3
Information Quality
●
 ⊗ 
Perceived Anthropomorphism
●
 ⊗ 
●
Perceived Interactivity
●
Social presence
 ⊗ 
●
Consistency
0.887519
0.823859
0.928026
raw coverage
0.750329
0.238064
0.340561
unique coverage
0.451905
0.0103811
0.100131
Overall solution coverage:
0.877179
Overall solution consistency:
0.870052


957
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
millennials belong to the more educated, tech-savvy 
members of society, spending more time on machines; they 
also appreciate innovative features with a human-like touch. 
This generation wants to save time and have experiences of 
shopping with high engagement.
Three solutions, complex, intermediate and parsimonious, 
are obtained from fsQCA analysis. The intermediate solution 
comprises of both core and peripheral conditions, there is 
a need to make the distinction to enhance an explanation 
of the interpretation. Through combined parsimonious and 
intermediate solutions, an elaborated and aggregated view 
of the findings may be presented. Based on the parsimonious 
and intermediate solutions in the current study, it can be 
seen that the presence of PI, SP and PA are core conditions 
for PUI whereas absence of IQ indicates it as the weak 
predicting variable. Moreover, to achieve higher purchase 
intention among millennials, the attributes of DAs can be 
combined with either (i) PI and IQ (model 1) (ii) PI, absence 
of PA and absence of SP (model 2) (iii) PA, SP with absence 
of IQ (iv) SP, PA and PI. This leads to an intermediate 
solution which has highlighted the core conditions, clearly 
presenting all core and peripheral conditions, to allow for a 
better interpretation of the findings.
These fsQCA results support the results obtained from 
PLS-SEM and ANN model applications. Table 10 presents 
in detail the findings from PLS-SEM analysis; this indicates 
the strongest effect of perceived interactivity (PI) on the PUI 
of millennials, also supported by the ANN method. The 
multi-method approach has similar findings that suggest to 
marketers that they should consider the combination of PI, 
PA and SP in AI powered chatbots or DAs when they are 
targeting millennials in an emerging economy like India. 
The results from fsQCA indicate that in the presence of PI, 
PA and SP can lead to high PUI but the negation or absence 
of the same characteristics of DA can lead to the desired 
outcome, depending on how they combine with other char-
acteristics. For a clear presentation of the findings, Table 10 
is formed.
Millennials are outward-looking, an aspirational popula-
tion who want to have ease of shopping, immediate access 
to brands and high comfortability. Millennials prefer tex-
ting compared to talking and prefer a casual interaction with 
chatbots. The results from multi-methods are significant for 
marketers and businesses aiming to develop a strategy to 
deliver a satisfying, contextual, interactive and memorable 
experience to millennials.
5.1  Theoretical and Practical Implications
The present study extends the empirical research through 
Uncanny Valley Theory (UVT), social presence and Theory 
of Planned Behavior (TPB), integrating the DA attributes 
effect on customer (millennials) purchase intention. This 
study extends the research on UVT and social presence 
theory to identify the effects of PA, SP and PI. These theo-
ries have contributed to exploring human responses towards 
machines as examined in past studies. With this study, the 
contribution is extended to explore the effect of PA, SP and 
PT of DA on millennials’ PUI. Further, TPB theory extends 
the research and identifies the purchase intention of the cus-
tomer and the relationship with DA.
Based on these findings, the theoretical contributions are 
presented. Primarily, this research has extended the knowl-
edge base on DA, CC and UVT. The study has enriched the 
body of literature relevant to DA, chatbots and AI chatbots 
(Balakrishnan & Dwivedi, 2021; Fernandes & Oliveira, 
2021). The study contributes to developing an association 
between DA attributes and the purchase intention of millen-
nials. The results also enhance many implications in the area 
of marketing and operations where the attributes of DA may 
augment the purchase actions among millennials. This study 
offers insight to researchers to extend their work in AI, DA 
and marketing functions. Malik et al. (2021) have suggested 
that AI may bring integration in organisational functions. In 
line with this, the current study provides a strong base for 
future marketing and business operations.
Besides the primary contribution, the current study pro-
vides the following contributions based on the hypotheses: 
1) The study extends knowledge related to anthropomor-
phism and UVT on DA attributes; 2) The current study 
has extended the knowledge of SP by showing the effect of 
humanness towards purchase intention among millennials. 
This is also supported by the theory of SP that proposes the 
relationship of social presence with services based on tech-
nology including social media and chatbots (Lankton et al., 
2015). Emerging from UVT, social presence theory and 
TPB models are important for predicting the behaviour or 
intention towards purchase. Only a few studies have shown 
the combination of other models with TPB, whereas others 
have incorporated critical factors into it (Ajzen, 1991). The 
current study has extended the TPB model to predict the 
customer intention based on DA attributes.
Based on these findings, it is clear that PUI has been 
influenced more by PI than SP and PA. As millennials are 
the most targeted users, marketers and technology devel-
opers need to improvise on the weak DA attributes. The 
initial stages of DA were focused on information, query 
handling and attractive features. But with recent advance-
ment, AI-enabled chatbots are more inclined towards deliv-
ering the interactive environment, engagement and social 
presence to provide a human-like experience to users. The 
same is reflected through the results; marketers and technol-
ogy developers need to integrate the customer journey with 
maximised functions. Examples such as the chat enabled 
interface of Oyo Rooms to search and book hotels, HDFC 
Life insurance chatbot, Domino’s and the intelligent chatbot 


958
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
Table 10   Comparative results of PLS-SEM, ANN and fsQCA
PLS SEM findings
ANN findings
fsQCA findings
PA attribute of AI powered digital assistants has a significant 
effect on the PUI of the millennials
PA has a 37% relative importance and second highest for PUI 
of millennials
PA is present in one conditions out of three conditions that 
explains the PUI of the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as: PA is a significant predictor of 
PUI for the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as: PA has a significant relative 
importance in the PUI of the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as
PA explains the high PUI of the millennials in 1 out of 3 solu-
tions
SP attribute of AI powered digital assistants has a significant 
effect on the PUI of the millennials
SP has a 32% relative importance and second highest for PUI 
of millennials
SP is present in one condition out of three conditions that 
explains the PUI of the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as: SP is a significant predictor of 
PUI for the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as: SP has a significant relative 
importance in the PUI of the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as
SP explains the high PUI of the millennials in 1 out of 3 solu-
tions
PI attribute of AI powered digital assistants has a significant 
effect on the PUI of the millennials
PI has a 100% relative importance and second highest for PUI 
of millennials
PI is present in two conditions out of three conditions that 
explain the PUI of the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as: PI is a most significant predictor 
of PUI for the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as: PI has a highest significant rela-
tive importance in the PUI of the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as: PI explains high PUI of the millen-
nials in 2 out of 3 solutions
IQ attribute of AI powered digital assistants has an insignifi-
cant effect on the PUI of the millennials
IQ has only 8% relative importance and least rated for PUI of 
millennials
IQ is present in one condition out of three conditions that 
explain the PUI of the millennials. Also, IQ is absent in the 
core conditions
Or it can be interpreted as: IQ is a non-significant predictor of 
PUI for the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as: PI has the least significant relative 
importance in the PUI of the millennials
Or it can be interpreted as: IQ can be either present or negated 
for the PUI of the millennials
The single solution obtained is the best solution
significant relative importance of the variables for PUI are 
calculated
Multiple solutions are possible and may refer to different types 
of users
The results indicate an R2 of 0.56.3, that justifies that 56.3% of 
the variance of intention
PI is the most significant predictor of PUI (with 100% normal-
ised relative importance)
The results indicate an overall solution coverage of 0.87, sug-
gesting 3 solutions cover the substantial proportion of PUI


959
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
on Facebook Messenger for ordering pizza show the strength 
of DA and its effect on purchase intention (Huang & Rust, 
2021).
The new breed of online shopping experiences has 
multiple touch points for users; it is therefore desirable to 
have AI-enabled chatbots to engage customers appropriately. 
This has a significant implication. With the advancement 
of technology and increasing usage of humanness, online 
purchases can be easily influenced for those users who can 
move from engagement with human agents into chatbot 
users. This will help firms to save costs while enhancing 
service satisfaction. Emerging technologies in the area of 
augmented reality provide opportunities to enhance the 
level of engagement among the users. Therefore, this study 
offers insights on how to incorporate augmented reality in 
interactivity and social presence.
During the recent disruptive environment, the relevance 
of machines has emerged more prominently. With 
smaller workforces, many working from home and safety 
guidelines in place, our focus has shifted to online shopping. 
Customers nowadays spend more time on the internet and 
purchase products through e-commerce sites. This change 
in customer behaviour is a thought-provoking process for 
organisations, marketers and developers to utilise machines 
optimally and depend less on humans. The pandemic 
has become a catalyst to transform the marketplace. The 
conversational AI market will reach $77.6 billion by 2022, 
with a 37.3% growth rate (CAGR) (International Data 
Corporation). The study conducted by Tsai et al. (2021) 
examined which factors of chatbot communication and 
profile design may drive chatbot effectiveness and also the 
mechanism underlying the messaging and design effects on 
consumer engagement. Shumanov and Johnson, (2021) has 
examined whether human–computer interactions can be 
more personalized by matching consumer personality with 
congruent machine personality using language. This study is 
useful for marketers and developers to draw up their future 
strategic plans for targeting customers. Also, the argument 
on firms saving costs, can be expanded as the deployment of 
chatbots can have a dual role, since they can be used both by 
consumers as well as employees and service agents whose 
job is to support consumers (Vassilakopoulou et al., 2022). 
There is major potential when humans and AI join forces 
(Raisch & Krakowski, 2021).With DA, marketers can reach 
the general public with less cost and perform their functions 
with more efficiency. As more marketers and customers use 
DA, the demand for the development of AI-enabled chatbots 
will rise.
6  Conclusion
The study examines the conversational commerce impact 
through DAs on millennial intention to purchase. The study 
has employed PLS-SEM, ANN and fsQCA to predict mil-
lennial purchase intention towards DA attributes. The results 
from PLS-SEM reveal that perceived interactivity has the 
highest significance in developing PUI followed by PA, SP 
and IQ among millennials. These findings were also tested 
through ANN and fsQCA, with results from all methods com-
plementing each other. The findings suggest that millenni-
als perceive DA to be sensitive, human-like, show empathy 
towards millennials’ expectations and are highly influenced 
by the interactivity characteristics of DA. Millennials belong 
to the educated and tech-savvy category; they spend more 
time on their machines and need innovative features such as a 
human-like touch. This study offers valuable insights into the 
areas of marketing, technology and operations. These results 
are significant for marketers and developers to develop future 
strategies that will deliver an enjoyable, contextual, interactive 
and memorable experience to millennials. Marketers can use 
this model to enhance the reach to millennials with less cost 
and more efficiency. As the usage of DA increases, marketers 
and developers need to focus on DA attributes to develop their 
future strategic plans for targeting millennials appropriately.
The study has few limitations. Firstly, the study 
covers a sample from only one country (India); thus, the 
intention to purchase among millennials is limited in the 
geographical context. The results can only be generalised to 
those countries which have similar conditions and context. 
However, this study can help researchers to understand 
and interpret the results through understanding the use and 
adoption of DA in India. Secondly, the study focused on the 
influence of DA attributes on millennial purchase intention 
using UVT theory. Although the current study investigates 
the key features of DA that should be focused on by 
marketers and developers, it is suggested to embrace more 
variables such as security and usefulness. Thirdly, there is a 
need to uncover other business models (B to B and B to G). 
Lastly, this study offers an initial insight into DA acceptance 
by millennials. Future work needs to incorporate studies for 
specific product categories and to develop strategies that 
are industry specific. The results can be extended to AI and 
machine learning approaches for identification of trends of 
customer purchases using DA. With the AI powered chatbots 
the information can be extracted from social media on how 
customers interact and engage with such technologies. 
Specifically, the study offers insight to examine the impact of 
PA, SP and PI independently on the PUI of the millennials.


960
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
Appendix
Fig. 6   Truth Table
Fig. 7   A sorted truth table in fsQCA based on raw consistency after removing combinations with low frequency


961
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
Fig. 8   Complex solution. Note: 
IQ Information Quality, PA 
Perceived Anthropomorphism, 
PI Perceived Interactivity, SP 
Social presence, PUI Purchase 
intention
--- COMPLEX SOLUTION --- 
frequency cutoff: 1 
consistency cutoff: 0.854436 
                
   raw       
 unique               
                
 coverage     
coverage    
consistency  
---------   
 ----------  
 ----------   
PI*IQ          
 0.750329     
0.451905   
  0.887519     
~PA*~SP*PI      0.238064     
0.0103811   
 0.823859     
PA*SP*~IQ       0.340561    
 0.100131    
 0.928026     
solution coverage: 0.877179 
solution consistency: 0.870052 
Fig. 9   Parsimonious solution. 
Note: IQ Information Quality, 
PA Perceived Anthropomor-
phism, PI Perceived Interactiv-
ity, SP Social presence, PUI 
Purchase intention
50 
Model: PUI = f(PA, SP, PI, IQ) 
Algorithm: Quine-McCluskey 
--- PARSIMONIOUS SOLUTION --- 
frequency cutoff: 1 
consistency cutoff: 0.854436 
         
  raw       
  unique               
        
 coverage     
coverage           consistency  
       
 ----------   
----------   
----------   
PI      
0.932326    
 0.0461236    
0.850414     
PA     
 0.863863     
 0.0144106   
 0.880604     
SP      
0.841831   
 0.00481826   
0.862884     
solution coverage: 0.976829 
solution consistency: 0.809445
Fig. 10   Intermediate solution. 
Note: IQ Information Quality, 
PA Perceived Anthropomor-
phism, PI Perceived Interactiv-
ity, SP Social presence, PUI 
Purchase intention
Model: PUI = f(PA, SP, PI, IQ) 
Algorithm: Quine-McCluskey 
--- INTERMEDIATE SOLUTION --- 
frequency cutoff: 1 
consistency cutoff: 0.854436 
Assumptions: 
               
    raw        
unique               
                
 coverage     
coverage    
consistency  
               
 ----------  
 ----------  
 ----------   
PI*IQ          
 0.750329     
0.451905     
0.887519     
~PA*~SP*PI      0.238064    
 0.0103811   
 0.823859     
PA*SP*~IQ       0.340561   
  0.100131     
0.928026     
solution coverage: 0.877179 
solution consistency: 0.870052 solution consistency: 0.809445


962
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
Declarations 
Conflict of Interest  The authors declare that they have no known com-
peting financial interests or personal relationships that could have ap-
peared to influence the work reported in this paper.
References
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organisational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 179–221. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0749-​5978(91)​90020-T
Algharabat, R. S., & Rana, N. P. (2020). Social commerce in emerg-
ing markets and its impact on online community engagement. 
Information Systems Frontiers, 1-22. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s10796-​020-​10041-4
Araujo, T. (2018). Living up to the chatbot hype: The influence of 
anthropomorphic design cues and communicative agency fram-
ing on conversational agent and company perceptions. Comput-
ers in Human Behavior, 85, 183–189. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
chb.​2018.​03.​051
Avolio, B. J., Yammarino, F. J., & Bass, B. M. (1991). Identifying 
common methods variance with data collected from a single 
source: An unresolved sticky issue. Journal of Management, 
17(3), 571–587. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​01492​06391​01700​303
Ayeh, J. K., Au, N., & Law, R. (2013). Predicting the intention to use 
consumer-generated media for travel planning. Tourism Man-
agement, 35, 132–143. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​tourm​an.​2012.​
06.​010
Balakrishnan, J., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2021). Conversational commerce: 
entering the next stage of AI-powered digital assistants. Annals 
of Operations Research, 1–35.
Bartneck, C., Kulić, D., Croft, E., & Zoghbi, S. (2009). Measurement 
instruments for the anthropomorphism, animacy, likeability, per-
ceived intelligence, and perceived safety of robots. International 
Journal of Social Robotics, 1(1), 71–81. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s12369-​008-​0001-3
Bellur, S., & Sundar, S. S. (2017). Talking health with a machine: 
How does message interactivity affect attitudes and cognitions? 
Human Communication Research, 43(1), 25–53. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1111/​jcom.​12147
Brahnam, S. (2009). Building character for artificial conversational 
agents: Ethos, ethics, believability, and credibility. PsychNology 
Journal, 7(1), 9–47.
Brill, T. M., Munoz, L., & Miller, R. J. (2019). Siri, Alexa, and other 
digital assistants: a study of customer satisfaction with artificial 
intelligence applications. Journal of Marketing Management, 
35(15-16), 1401–1436.
Broadbent, E. (2017). Interactions with robots: The truths we reveal 
about ourselves. Annual Review of Psychology, 68, 627–652. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev-​psych-​010416-​043958
Brown, S. A. (2008). Household technology adoption, use, and 
impacts: Past, present, and future. Information Systems Frontiers, 
10(4), 397. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10796-​008-​9098-z
Büyükdağ, N., Soysal, A. N., & Kitapci, O. (2020). The effect of spe-
cific discount pattern in terms of price promotions on perceived 
price attractiveness and purchase intention: An experimen-
tal research. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 55, 
102112. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jretc​onser.​2020.​102112
Canziani, B., & MacSween, S. (2021). Consumer acceptance of voice-
activated smart home devices for product information seek-
ing and online ordering. Computers in Human Behavior, 119, 
106714. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2021.​106714
Chattaraman, V., Kwon, W. S., Gilbert, J. E., & Ross, K. (2019). Should 
AI-Based, conversational digital assistants employ social-or task-
oriented interaction style? A task-competency and reciprocity 
perspective for older adults. Computers in Human Behavior, 90, 
315–330. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2018.​08.​048
Cheong, J. W., Muthaly, S., Kuppusamy, M., & Han, C. (2020). The 
study of online reviews and its relationship to online purchase 
intention for electronic products among the millennials in Malay-
sia. Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics, 32(7), 
1519–1538. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​APJML-​03-​2019-​0192
Chong, A. Y. L. (2013). A two-staged SEM-neural network approach 
for understanding and predicting the determinants of m-com-
merce adoption. Expert Systems with Applications, 40(4), 
1240–1247.
Chong, T., Yu, T., Keeling, D. I., & de Ruyter, K. (2021). AI-chatbots 
on the services frontline addressing the challenges and opportu-
nities of agency. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 63, 
102735. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jretc​onser.​2021.​102735
Choudrie, J., Patil, S., Kotecha, K., Matta, N., & Pappas, I. (2021). 
Applying and understanding an advanced, novel deep learning 
approach: A Covid 19, text based, emotions analysis study. Infor-
mation Systems Frontiers, 23(6), 1431–1514.
Ciechanowski, L., Przegalinska, A., Magnuski, M., & Gloor, P. (2019). 
In the shades of the uncanny valley: An experimental study of 
human–chatbot interaction. Future Generation Computer Sys-
tems, 92, 539–548. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​future.​2018.​01.​055
Cui, Y. G., van Esch, P., & Jain, S. P. (2021). Just walk out: The effect 
of AI-enabled checkouts. European Journal of Marketing. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​EJM-​02-​2020-​0122 ahead-of-print.
Cyr, D., Head, M., Larios, H., & Pan, B. (2009). Exploring human 
images in website design: a multi-method approach. MIS Quar-
terly, 333, 539–566.
Dedeke, A. N. (2016). Travel web-site design: Information task-fit, 
service quality and purchase intention. Tourism Management, 54, 
541–554. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​tourm​an.​2016.​01.​001
Epley, N., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2007). On seeing human: A 
three-factor theory of anthropomorphism. Psychological Review, 
114(4), 864–886. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0033-​295X.​114.4.​864
Fan, A., Wu, L. L., & Mattila, A. S. (2016). Does anthropomorphism 
influence customers’ switching intentions in the self-service tech-
nology failure context? Journal of Services Marketing, 30(7), 
713–723. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​JSM-​07-​2015-​0225
Fernandes, T., & Oliveira, E. (2021). Understanding consumers’ 
acceptance of automated technologies in service encounters: 
Drivers of digital voice assistants adoption. Journal of Business 
Research, 122, 180–191. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusr​es.​2020.​
08.​058
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation 
models with unobservable variables and measurement error. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1), 39–50. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1177/​00222​43781​01800​104
Fuller, C. M., Simmering, M. J., Atinc, G., Atinc, Y., & Babin, B. 
J. (2016). Common methods variance detection in business 
research. Journal of Business Research, 69(8), 3192–3198. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusr​es.​2015.​12.​008
Gefen, D., & Straub, D. W. (2004). Consumer trust in B2C e-Com-
merce and the importance of social presence: Experiments in 
e-Products and e-Services. Omega, 32(6), 407–424. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​omega.​2004.​01.​006
Gelhard, C., von Delft, S., & Gudergan, S. P. (2016). Heterogeneity 
in dynamic capability configurations: Equifinality and strategic 
performance. Journal of Business Research, 69(11), 5272–5279.
Go, E., & Sundar, S. S. (2019). Humanizing chatbots: The effects of 
visual, identity and conversational cues on humanness percep-
tions. Computers in Human Behavior, 97, 304–316.


963
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
Greckhamer, T., Furnari, S., Fiss, P. C., & Aguilera, R. V. (2018). 
Studying configurations with qualitative comparative analysis: 
Best practices in strategy and organization research. Strategic 
Organization, 16(4), 482–495.
Gupta, A., Deokar, A., Iyer, L., Sharda, R., & Schrader, D. (2018). Big 
data & analytics for societal impact: Recent research and trends. 
Information Systems Frontiers, 20(2), 185–194.
Hair, J. F., Sarstedt, M., Ringle, C. M., & Mena, J. A. (2012). An 
assessment of the use of partial least squares structural equa-
tion modeling in marketing research. Journal of the Academy 
of Marketing Science, 40(3), 414–433. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11747-​011-​0261-6
Hair, J. F., Jr., Sarstedt, M., Ringle, C. M., & Gudergan, S. P. (2017). 
Advanced issues in partial least squares structural equation 
modeling. Sage publications.
Hair, J. F., Risher, J. J., Sarstedt, M., & Ringle, C. M. (2019). When to 
use and how to report the results of PLS-SEM. European Busi-
ness Review, 31(1), 2–24.
Hasan, N., Bao, Y., & Chiong, R. (2022). A multi-method analyti-
cal approach to predicting young adults’ intention to invest in 
mHealth during the COVID-19 pandemic. Telematics and Infor-
matics, 68, 101765.
He, J., & Freeman, L. A. (2010). Understanding the formation of gen-
eral computer self-efficacy. Communications of the Association 
for Information Systems, 26(1), 12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17705/​
1CAIS.​02612
Henseler, J., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2015). A new criterion 
for assessing discriminant validity in variance-based structural 
equation modeling. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Sci-
ence, 43(1), 115–135.
Hew, K. F., Lan, M., Tang, Y., Jia, C., & Lo, C. K. (2019). Where is 
the “theory” within the field of educational technology research? 
British Journal of Educational Technology, 50(3), 956–971.
Ho, C. C., & MacDorman, K. F. (2017). Measuring the uncanny valley 
effect. International Journal of Social Robotics, 9(1), 129–139. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12369-​016-​0380-9
Hu, Q., Lu, Y., Pan, Z., Gong, Y., & Yang, Z. (2021). Can AI artifacts 
influence human cognition? The effects of artificial autonomy 
in intelligent personal assistants. International Journal of Infor-
mation Management, 56, 102250. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijinf​
omgt.​2020.​102250
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2021). A strategic framework for arti-
ficial intelligence in marketing. Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, 49(1), 30–50. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11747-​020-​00749-9
Idemudia, E. C., Raisinghani, M. S., & Samuel-Ojo, O. (2018). The 
contributing factors of continuance usage of social media: 
An empirical analysis. Information Systems Frontiers, 20(6), 
1267–1280.
Ischen, C., Araujo, T., van Noort, G., Voorveld, H., & Smit, E. (2020). 
“I Am Here to Assist You Today”: The Role of Entity, Interactiv-
ity and Experiential Perceptions in Chatbot Persuasion. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 1-25. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1080/​08838​151.​2020.​18342​97v
Jang, M., Jung, Y., & Kim, S. (2021). Investigating managers’ under-
standing of chatbots in the Korean financial industry. Computers 
in Human Behavior, 120, 106747. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​
2021.​106747
Kamide, H., Kawabe, K., Shigemi, S., & Arai, T. (2014). Relationship 
between familiarity and humanness of robots: Quantification of 
psychological impressions toward humanoid robots. Advanced 
Robotics, 28(12), 821–832. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​01691​864.​
2014.​893837
Kätsyri, J., Förger, K., Mäkäräinen, M., & Takala, T. (2015). A review 
of empirical evidence on different uncanny valley hypotheses: 
Support for perceptual mismatch as one road to the valley of 
eeriness. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 390. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
3389/​fpsyg.​2015.​00390
Kendall, L., Chaudhuri, B., & Bhalla, A. (2020). Understanding tech-
nology as situated practice: Everyday use of voice user inter-
faces among diverse groups of users in Urban India. Informa-
tion System Frontiers, 22, 585–605. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s10796-​020-​10015-6
Kline, R. B. (2015). Principles and practice of structural equation 
modeling. Guilford publications.
Kock, N. (2015). Common method bias in PLS-SEM: A full collinear-
ity assessment approach. International Journal of e-Collabora-
tion (ijec), 11(4), 1–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4018/​ijec.​20151​00101
Kuligowska, K. (2015). Commercial chatbot: performance evaluation, 
usability metrics and quality standards of embodied conversa-
tional agents. Professionals Center for Business Research, 2. 
http://​pcbr.​net/​issue/​0202/. (Accessed on 20.9.2021).
Labroo, A. A., Dhar, R., & Schwarz, N. (2008). Of frog wines and 
frowning watches: Semantic priming, perceptual fluency, and 
brand evaluation. Journal of Consumer Research, 34(6), 819–
831. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1086/​523290
Lankton, N. K., McKnight, D. H., & Tripp, J. (2015). Technology, 
humanness, and trust: rethinking trust in technology. Journal 
of the Association for Information Systems, 16(10), 880–918. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​17705/​1jais.​00411
Lee, K., Lee, K. Y., & Sheehan, L. (2020a). Hey Alexa! A magic spell 
of social glue? Sharing a smart voice assistant speaker and its 
impact on users’ perception of group harmony. Information 
Systems Frontiers, 22(3), 563–583. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s10796-​019-​09975-1
Lee, V. H., Hew, J. J., Leong, L. Y., Tan, G. W. H., & Ooi, K. B. 
(2020b). Wearable payment: A deep learning-based dual-stage 
SEM-ANN analysis. Expert Systems with Applications, 157, 
113477.
Leong, L. Y., Hew, T. S., Ooi, K. B., & Chong, A. Y. L. (2020). Predict-
ing the antecedents of trust in social commerce–A hybrid struc-
tural equation modeling with neural network approach. Journal 
of Business Research, 110, 24–40. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusr​
es.​2019.​11.​056
Lew, Z., Walther, J. B., Pang, A., & Shin, W. (2018). Interactivity in 
online chat: Conversational contingency and response latency 
in computer-mediated communication. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 23(4), 201–221.
Li, L., Lee, K. Y., Emokpae, E., & Yang, S. B. (2021a). What makes 
you continuously use chatbot services? Evidence from chinese 
online travel agencies. Electronic Markets, 31(3), 575–599.
Li, W., Mao, Y., & Zhou, L. (2021b). The impact of interactivity on 
user satisfaction in digital social reading: Social presence as a 
mediator. International Journal of Human–Computer Interac-
tion, 1-12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​10447​318.​2021.​18988​50
Liebana-Cabanillas, F., Marinkovic, V., & Kalinic, Z. (2017). A 
SEM-neural network approach for predicting antecedents of 
m-commerce acceptance. International Journal of Information 
Management, 37(2), 14–24. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijinf​omgt.​
2016.​10.​008
MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, P. M. (2012). Common method bias 
in marketing: Causes, mechanisms, and procedural remedies. 
Journal of Retailing, 88(4), 542–555. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
jretai.​2012.​08.​001
Malik, N., Tripathi, S. N., Kar, A. K., & Gupta, S. (2021). Impact of 
artificial intelligence on employees working in industry 4.0 led 
organisations. International Journal of Manpower. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1108/​IJM-​03-​2021-​0173
Martin, A. E., & Phillips, K. W. (2017). What “blindness” to gen-
der differences helps women see and do: Implications for con-
fidence, agency, and action in male-dominated environments. 


964
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
Organisational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 142, 
28–44. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​obhdp.​2017.​07.​004
Mattke, J., Maier, C., Weitzel, T., Gerow, J. E., & Thatcher, J. B. 
(2022). Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) In Informa-
tion Systems Research: Status Quo, Guidelines, and Future 
Directions. Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 50, 208–240. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17705/​1CAIS.​05008
Mayer, D., & Harrison, N. (2019). As customers begin to shop through 
voice assistants, what can brands do to stand out? Harvard Busi-
ness Review, Retrieved August, 15, 2019.
McLean, G., Osei-Frimpong, K., & Barhorst, J. (2021). Alexa, do voice 
assistants influence consumer brand engagement?–Examining 
the role of AI powered voice assistants in influencing consumer 
brand engagement. Journal of Business Research, 124, 312–328. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusr​es.​2020.​11.​045
Messina, C. (2016). 2016 will be the year of conversational commerce. 
https://​medium.​com/​chris-​messi​na/​2016-​will-​be-​the-​year-​of-​
conve​rsati​onal-​comme​rce-​1586e​85e39​91#.​bsdsk​kyji. Accessed 
on 1 Mar 2021.
Mir, U. B., Sharma, S., Kar, A. K., & Gupta, M. P. (2020). Critical 
success factors for integrating artificial intelligence and robotics. 
Digital Policy, Regulation and Governance., 22(4), 307–333.
Mori, M. (1970). The uncanny valley. Energy, 7(4), 33–35.
Mori, M., MacDorman, K. F., & Kageki, N. (2012). The uncanny valley 
[from the field]. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, 19(2), 
98–100. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​MRA.​2012.​21928​11
Moriuchi, E. (2019). Okay, Google! An empirical study on voice assis-
tants on consumer engagement and loyalty. Psychology & Mar-
keting, 36(5), 489–501.
Moussawi, S., Koufaris, M., & Benbunan-Fich, R. (2020). How percep-
tions of intelligence and anthropomorphism affect adoption of 
personal intelligent agents. Electronic Markets, 1-22. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s12525-​020-​00411-w
Nass, C., Steuer, J., & Tauber, E. R. (1994, April). Computers are social 
actors. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human fac-
tors in computing systems (pp. 72–78). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​
191666.​191703
Negnevitsky, M. (2011) Artificial intelligence: A guide to intelligent 
systems (3rd ed. pp. 471) Pearson Education Limited, Harlow, 
England.
Nordheim, C. B., Folstad, A., & Bjorkli, C. A. (2019). An initial model 
of trust in chatbots for customer service—Findings from a ques-
tionnaire study. Interacting with Computers, 31(3), 317–335. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​iwc/​iwz022
Nunnally, J. C., & Bernstein, I. H. (1994). Psychometric theory (3rd 
ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Oh, J., & Sundar, S. S. (2015). How does interactivity persuade? An 
experimental test of interactivity on cognitive absorption, elabo-
ration, and attitudes. Journal of Communication, 65(2), 213–236. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​jcom.​12147
Ooi, K. B., & Tan, G. W. H. (2016). Mobile technology acceptance 
model: An investigation using mobile users to explore smart-
phone credit card. Expert Systems with Applications, 59, 33–46. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eswa.​2016.​04.​015
Pantano, E., & Viassone, M. (2015). Engaging consumers on new inte-
grated multichannel retail settings: Challenges for retailers. Jour-
nal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 25, 106–114. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​jretc​onser.​2015.​04.​003
Pantano, E., & Pizzi, G. (2020). Forecasting artificial intelligence on 
online customer assistance: Evidence from chatbot patents analy-
sis. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 55, 102096.
Papamitsiou, Z., Pappas, I. O., Sharma, K., & Giannakos, M. N. (2020). 
Utilizing multimodal data through fsQCA to explain engagement 
in adaptive learning. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technolo-
gies, 13(4), 689–703.
Pappas, I. O. (2018). User experience in personalized online shopping: 
A fuzzy-set analysis. European Journal of Marketing, 52(7/8), 
1679–2170.
Pappas, I. O., & Woodside, A. G. (2021). Fusszzy-set Qualitative Com-
parative Analysis (fsQCA): Guidelines for research practice in 
Information Systems and marketing. International Journal of 
Information Management, 58, 102310.
Pappas, I. O., Giannakos, M. N., Jaccheri, L., & Sampson, D. G. 
(2017). Assessing student behavior in computer science educa-
tion with an fsQCA approach: The role of gains and barriers. 
ACM Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE), 17(2), 
1–23.
Park, J., Hyun, H., & Thavisay, T. (2021). A study of antecedents and 
outcomes of social media WOM towards luxury brand purchase 
intention. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 58, 
102272. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jretc​onser.​2020.​102272
Patwa, N., Sivarajah, U., Seetharaman, A., Sarkar, S., Maiti, K., & 
Hingorani, K. (2021). Towards a circular economy: An emerging 
economies context. Journal of Business Research, 122, 725–735. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusr​es.​2020.​05.​015
Payne, C. R., Hyman, M. R., Niculescu, M., & Huhmann, B. A. (2013). 
Anthropomorphic responses to new-to-market logos. Journal of 
Marketing Management, 29(1–2), 122–140. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1080/​02672​57X.​2013.​770413
Pierce, T. (2009). Social anxiety and technology: Face-to-face com-
munication versus technological communication among teens. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 25(6), 1367–1372.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2012). Sources 
of method bias in social science research and recommendations 
on how to control it. Annual Review of Psychology, 63, 539–569. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev-​psych-​120710-​100452
Poncin, I., Garnier, M., Mimoun, M. S. B., & Leclercq, T. (2017). 
Smart technologies and shopping experience: Are gamification 
interfaces effective? The case of the Smart store. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 124, 320–331. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2017.​01.​025
Porra, J., Lacity, M., & Parks, M. S. (2020). Can Computer Based 
Human-Likeness Endanger Humanness?” – A Philosophical and 
Ethical Perspective on Digital Assistants Expressing Feelings 
They Can’t Have”. Information System Frontier, 22, 533–547. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10796-​019-​09969-z
Purington, A., Taft, J. G., Sannon, S., Bazarova, N. N., & Taylor, S. 
H. (2017). " Alexa is my new BFF" Social Roles, User Satisfac-
tion, and Personification of the Amazon Echo. In Proceedings of 
the 2017 CHI conference extended abstracts on human factors 
in computing systems (pp. 2853–2859). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​
30270​63.​30532​46
Qiu, L., & Benbasat, I. (2009). Evaluating anthropomorphic product 
recommendation agents: A social relationship perspective to 
designing information systems. Journal of Management Infor-
mation Systems, 25(4), 145–182. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2753/​MIS07​
42-​12222​50405
Qiu, L., & Benbasat, I. (2010). A study of demographic embodiments 
of product recommendation agents in electronic commerce. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 68(10), 
669–688.
Ragin, C. C. (2006). Set relations in social research: Evaluating their 
consistency and coverage. Political Analysis, 14(3), 291–310.
Ragin, C. C. (2009). Redesigning social inquiry: Fuzzy sets and 
beyond. University of Chicago Press.
Raisch, S., & Krakowski, S. (2021). Artificial intelligence and man-
agement: The automation–augmentation paradox. Academy of 
Management Review, 46(1), 192–210.
Ramadan, Z. B. (2021). “Alexafying” shoppers: The examination of 
Amazon’s captive relationship strategy. Journal of Retailing and 


965
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966	
1 3
Consumer Services, 62, 102610. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jretc​
onser.​2021.​102610
Reio, T. G., Jr. (2010). The threat of common method variance bias 
to theory building. Human Resource Development Review, 9(4), 
405–411. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​15344​84310​380331
Shankar, V., Kalyanam, K., Setia, P., Golmohammadi, A., Tirunillai, 
S., Douglass, T., ... & Waddoups, R. (2021). How technology is 
changing retail. Journal of Retailing, 97(1), 13-27. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​jretai.​2020.​10.​006
Sharma, S. K., & Sharma, M. (2019). Examining the role of trust 
and quality dimensions in the actual usage of mobile banking 
services: An empirical investigation. International Journal of 
Information Management, 44, 65–75.
Sheehan, B., Jin, H. S., & Gottlieb, U. (2020). Customer service chat-
bots: Anthropomorphism and adoption. Journal of Business 
Research, 115, 14–24. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusr​es.​2020.​
04.​030
Shin, D. (2019). How do technological properties influence user affor-
dance of wearable technologies? Interaction Studies, 20(2), 
307–338.
Shin, D., Choi, M., Kim, J. H., & Lee, J. G. (2016). Interaction, engage-
ment, and perceived interactivity in single-handed interaction. 
Internet Research, 26(5), 1134–1157. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​
IntR-​12-​2014-​0312
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of 
telecommunications. Wiley.
Shumanov, M., & Johnson, L. (2021). Making conversations with chat-
bots more personalized. Computers in Human Behavior, 117, 
106627.
Srivastava, S. C., & Chandra, S. (2018). Social presence in virtual 
world collaboration: An uncertainty reduction perspective using 
a mixed methods approach. MIS Quarterly, 42(3), 779–804. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​25300/​MISQ/​2018/​11914
Sugumaran, V., Geetha, T. V., Manjula, D., & Gopal, H. (2017). Guest 
editorial: Computational intelligence and applications. Informa-
tion Systems Frontiers, 19(5), 969–1228. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s10796-​019-​09969-z
Sundar, S. S., Bellur, S., Oh, J., Jia, H., & Kim, H. S. (2016). Theoreti-
cal importance of contingency in human-computer interaction: 
Effects of message interactivity on user engagement. Communi-
cation Research, 43(5), 595–625. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00936​
50214​534962
Tobias-Mamina, R. J., Maziriri, E. T., & Kempen, E. (2021). Determi-
nants of consumer-generated-content usage for apparel shopping: 
The moderating effect of gender. Cogent Business & Manage-
ment, 8(1), 1969766.
Tsai, W. H. S., Liu, Y., & Chuan, C. H. (2021). How chatbots’ social 
presence communication enhances consumer engagement: The 
mediating role of parasocial interaction and dialogue. Journal of 
Research in Interactive Marketing, 15(3), 460–482.
Urgen, B. A., Kutas, M., & Saygin, A. P. (2018). Uncanny valley as 
a window into predictive processing in the social brain. Neu-
ropsychologia, 114, 181–185. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neuro​
psych​ologia.​2018.​04.​027
Vassilakopoulou, P., Haug, A., Salvesen, L. M., & O. Pappas, I. (2022). 
Developing human/AI interactions for chat-based customer ser-
vices: lessons learned from the Norwegian government. Euro-
pean Journal of Information Systems, 1–13.
Venkateshv, & Johnson, P. (2002). Telecommuting technology imple-
mentations: A within-and between-subjects longitudinal field 
study. Personnel Psychology, 55(3), 661–687. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1111/j.​1744-​6570.​2002.​tb001​25.x
Wilson, H. J., & Daugherty, P. R. (2018). Collaborative intelligence: 
Humans and AI are joining forces. Harvard Business Review, 
96(4), 114–123.
Woodside, A. G. (2013). Moving beyond multiple regression analy-
sis to algorithms: Calling for adoption of a paradigm shift from 
symmetric to asymmetric thinking in data analysis and crafting 
theory. Journal of Business Research, 66(4), 463–472.
Yadav, B., Ch, S., Mathur, S., & Adamowski, J. (2016). Discharge 
forecasting using an online sequential extreme learning machine 
(OS-ELM) model: A case study in Neckar River, Germany. 
Measurement, 92, 433–445. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​measu​
rement.​2016.​06.​042
Yang, F., & Shen, F. (2018). Effects of web interactivity: A meta-
analysis. Communication Research, 45(5), 635–658. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1177/​00936​50217​700748
Zhong, Y., Oh, S., & Moon, H. C. (2021). Service transformation under 
industry 4.0: Investigating acceptance of facial recognition pay-
ment through an extended technology acceptance model. Tech-
nology in Society, 64, 101515. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techs​oc.​
2020.​101515
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor holds exclusive rights to this article under 
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); 
author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article 
is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.
Manu Sharma   is an Associate professor at Graphic Era Deemed to be 
University, India and Visiting research fellow at Guildhall School of 
Business and Law, London Metropolitan University, London, United 
Kingdom (UK). She has received her Post-Doctoral Fellowship 
sponsored by Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR), 
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, 
from Doon University, INDIA. For the last ten years, she has been 
contributing in teaching and research. She has developed skills in 
qualitative and quantitative research methods such as Multi-Criteria 
Decision Making, Fuzzy Theory, Multivariate analysis etc. Her current 
research areas are Digital supply chains, Digital Marketing, Circular 
economy, Sustainability, Waste management, Including Industry 
4.0, Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence, Information, 
Education, and Communication (IEC) campaigns, Omnichannel 
Retailing and Soft-computing Applications in Supply Chain 
Management. She is serving various journals as an editorial board 
member in the area of Digital Technologies, Sustainable development, 
Waste Management, Supply Chains and Digital Marketing published 
by Emerald, Springer, Elsevier and IGI. Email id: manu.sharma@
geu.ac.in; ORCID: https://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0001-​7339-​7780; SCOPUS 
AUTHOR ID: 5719878058
Sudhanshu Joshi  currently working in Operations & Supply Chain 
Management Area, Doon University, INDIA. He is the Visiting 
Professor (Research) with Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute 
(AAII), University of Technology Sydney, Australia. His research 
interest anchored within Digital-Twin, Cyber Supply Chain 
Management with special focus on green supply chain network design, 
sustainable supply chain design, and coordination in humanitarian 
supply chain network, application of big data analytics in sustainable 
and humanitarian supply chains, emerging technologies (Including 
Industry 4.0), Circular Economy, Agriculture Supply Chain and Soft-
computing Applications in Supply Chain Management. He is member 
with leading Societies including CSI, IEEE, POMS, INFORMS. He 
is a series editor of research note series CRC press, Taylor & Francis. 
Email id: sudhanshujoshi@doonuniversity.ac.in; ORCID: http://​orcid.​
org/​0000-​0003-​4748-​5001; SCOPUS AUTHOR ID: 56111179800


966
	
Information Systems Frontiers (2024) 26:943–966
1 3
Sunil Luthra   is working as the Director-Principal at Ch. Ranbir Singh 
State Institute of Engineering & Technology, JhajjarHaryana, India. He 
is also Visiting Professor at the ‘Centre for Supply Chain Improvement, 
University of Derby, Derby, United Kingdom. He has contributed over 
240 research papers in inter-national referred and national journals and 
conferences at international and national level. He has an excellent 
research track record (over 1000 cumulative research impact factor 
points; received more than 11700 citations on Google Scholar; 
H-index–57 on Google Scholar). He has received many Awards and 
Honours for the research and teaching. He published many research 
articles in highly reputed journals like Transportation Research Part 
E Logistics and Transportation Review, Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, Journal of Cleaner Production, Journal of Business 
Research, International Journal of Production Research, International 
Journal of Logistics Management, Government Information Quarterly, 
Production Planning & Control, Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change, Business Strategy and the Environment and many more. He 
is working as an associate editor in the Journal of Cleaner Production. 
He was also acted as a Guest Editor of many reputed journals such 
as Journal of Cleaner Production, Technology Forecasting & Social 
Change, Resources Policy and Resources, Conservation and Recycling 
etc. He is reviewing papers for more 50 reputed journals. He is on 
editorial board of many reputed journals. He has published 06 books 
with reputed publishers such as CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 
LLC and New Age International Publisher (P) Ltd. etc. His research 
interests are: Productions & Operations Management; Sustainable 
Production and Consumption; Green/Sustainable/Circular Supply 
Chain Management (GSCM/SSCM/CSCM); Sustainable societies; 
Net zero economies; Digitisation in Supply Chain; Industry 4.0/
Industry 5.0; Internet of Things (IoT) and Smart Cities etc. Email id: 
sunilluthra1977@gmail.com; GoogleScholar: http://​schol​ar.​google.​
com/​citat​ions?​user=​os6MG​awAAA​AJ&​hl=​en; Research Gate: http://​
www.​resea​rchga​te.​net/​profi​le/​Sunil_​Luthra; ORCID ID: https://​orcid.​
org/​0000-​0001-​7571-​1331; SCOPUS AUTHOR ID: 43361407000
Anil Kumar   is a Senior Lecturer (Associate Professor) at Guildhall 
School of Business and Law, London Metropolitan University (LMU), 
London, U.K. For the last eleven years, he has been associated with 
teaching and research. Before joining LMU, he was Post-Doctoral 
Research Fellow in the area of Decision Sciences at the Centre for 
Supply Chain Improvement, University of Derby, United Kingdom 
(UK). He earned his Ph.D. in Management Science from ABV-Indian 
Institute of Information Technology and Management, Gwalior, India. 
He did his graduation in Mathematics (Hons) and MSc (Mathematics) 
from Kurukshetra University, India. He earned his Master of Business 
Administration (MBA) and qualified National Eligibility Test (NET), 
June 2011. He has contributed over 130 + research papers in interna-
tional referred & national journals, and conferences at the interna-
tional and national levels. He has sound analytical capabilities to handle 
commercial consultancy projects and to deliver business improvement 
projects. He has skills and expertise in Advance Statistics Models, 
Multivariate Analysis, Multi-Criteria Decision Making, Fuzzy Theory, 
Fuzzy Optimisation, Fuzzy Multi-Criteria Decision Making, Grey The-
ory and Analysis, Machine Learning, Application of Soft-Computing, 
Econometrics Models etc. His areas of research are sustainability sci-
ence, green/sustainable supply chain management, customer retention, 
green purchasing behaviour, sustainable procurement, sustainable 
development, circular economy, Industry 4.0, performance measure-
ment, human capital in supply chain and operations, decision model-
ling for sustainable business, and integration of operation area with 
other areas. He published many research articles in A*/A as per ABDC 
indexed and 4*/3* as per ABS journals like International Journal of 
Operations & Production Management, Transportation Research Part 
E Logistics and Transportation Review, Journal of Business Research, 
International Journal of Production Research, Government Information 
Quarterly, Production Planning & Control, Technological Forecasting 
and Social Change, Business Strategy and the Environment, Journal 
of Cleaner Production etc.…


