# 9. 연구논문_CAF-ODNN Complementary attention fusion with optimized deep neural network for multimodal fake news detection

---
**Source:** [[9. 연구논문_CAF-ODNN Complementary attention fusion with optimized deep neural network for multimodal fake news detection.pdf]]
**Category:** #mba #ai
**Imported:** 2026-03-05

Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
Available online 14 January 2024
0306-4573/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
CAF-ODNN: Complementary attention fusion with optimized deep 
neural network for multimodal fake news detection 
Alex Munyole Luvembe , Weimin Li *, Shaohau Li , Fangfang Liu , Xing Wu 
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Multimodal fake news 
Image processing 
Optimization 
Attention fusion 
Grid search 
Instance normalization 
A B S T R A C T   
Fake news is a real problem; unfortunately, it seems to worsen. Even though some false news 
detection methods have made significant progress, current multimodal approaches integrate 
cross-modal features directly without considering uncorrelated semantic representations may 
introduce noise into the multimodal features. This phenomenon reduces model accuracy by 
obscuring subtle differences between text and images crucial for identifying fake news. Uncor­
related semantics also reduce the detection accuracy since the identification often relies on these 
subtle differences. To address these challenges, we propose a unified Complementary Attention 
Fusion with an Optimized Deep Neural Network (CAF-ODNN) that captures subtle cross-modal 
relationships for multimodal fake news detection. CAF introduces image captioning to repre­
sent images semantically, allowing bidirectional complementary attention between modalities 
based on a scaled dot product to learn fine-grained correlations. A dedicated alignment and 
normalization component is incorporated to calibrate fused representations based on channel 
statistics, ensuring the semantics are preserved across modalities during the interaction, thus 
improving upon the simple concatenation used in existing fusion approaches. To improve feature 
extraction, an Optimized Deep Neural Network (ODNN) is implemented that exploits composi­
tional learning. ODNN is designed with three fully connected layers to learn higher-level repre­
sentations from CAF-fused features. Model parameters are then systematically tuned beyond 
standard random search techniques to identify configurations, maximizing feature quality and 
detection accuracy. Our proposed method outperforms comparable approaches on standard 
metrics on four real-world datasets, highlighting the importance of complementary attention 
fusion with optimization in identifying fake news.   
1. Introduction 
Social media has transformed online communication and interactions, making it easier for individuals to establish relationships and 
connect online. However, these platforms have also become hubs for fake news and misinformation dissemination (Olan et al., 2022). 
Since they are user-centric, they rarely focus on the accuracy or reliability of the news they share. As a result, sensational or 
controversial content, spreads far and wide as people share it with their networks. A misleading claim, for instance, that chloroquine 
could cure COVID-19 led many people to consume chloroquine phosphate, trusting it would safeguard them from the deadly virus. 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: wmli@shu.edu.cn (W. Li).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Information Processing and Management 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/infoproman 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2024.103653 
Received 25 June 2023; Received in revised form 3 January 2024; Accepted 4 January 2024   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
2
Unfortunately, this incident resulted in deaths and hospitalizations.1 Misinformation akin to these preys on people’s trust in biased 
information, achieving the manipulator’s goals. Recent years have seen an increase in fake news, making it more critical than ever to 
distinguish between true and false information. Thus, there has been an exponential rise of third-party fact-checking services and 
content moderation to correct fabricated news and prevent the dissemination of misleading and inaccurate information (Kry´sci´nski 
et al., 2020), (Giachanou et al., 2022), (Bagade et al., 2020), (Paschalides et al., 2021), (Munyole et al., 2023), (Li et al., 2022) and 
(Sengupta et al., 2021). However, despite the progress, it is evident that significant amount of effort is still required to ensure social 
media remains a safe and reliable source of information and a platform for building relationships and fostering social interactions by 
effectively preventing misinformation proliferation. 
A multimodal fake news detection system analyzes multiple modalities, such as text, images, and videos, to determine whether a 
piece of content is fake or real. The approach considers that multiple modalities provide deeper understanding of fake news, thus 
helping to resolve complexities related to misinformation. A key aspect of existing multimodal false news detection algorithms is the 
direct integration (concatenation) of multimodal representations to enhance performance. Based on this perspective, Singhal et al. 
(2019) proposed SpotFake model for detecting fake news by leveraging textual and visual information. SpotFake utilized BERT for 
textual embeddings and VGG19 for images to learn contextual information based on the input data. A universal multimodal framework 
was also developed by Wang et al. (2018) based on time-sensitive events that learned temporal dynamics and related relationships. In a 
follow-up study, the authors employed a simulated learning via meta-learning to combine a small number of data instances (Wang 
et al., 2021). Khattar et al. (2019) proposed a bimodal variational autoencoder (MVAE) that incorporated information from text and 
image to detect fake news. MVAE learned a shared representation of the input data, which improved classification performance by 
capturing complementary information in different modalities. Methods based on attention (Sachan et al., 2021) employ cross-modal 
attention techniques to detect false information online by recognizing interdependencies and relationships between textual and visual 
elements. However, these approaches result in sub-optimal performance since they fail to capture all relevant information. The above 
methods have proven effective, but a simple combination of image and text features may not always provide reliable information in 
every instance. In addition, the veracity of news is not determined by the correlation between the image and text alone since little 
semantic similarity between the text and image features can result in a noisy representation. The fact that fake news disguises itself as 
real using subtle differences in the text and image makes detection via direct fusion difficult. The methods that exploit attention, on the 
other hand, are sensitive to input noise, including variations and perturbations. Even minor disturbances in the input can potentially 
influence the attention weights and ultimately impact the fusion process. 
The concatenation approach utilized by numerous multimodal fake news detection methods may not adequately represent the 
distinctions between low-level visual features extracted from the image and the high-level semantic concepts conveyed by the text. 
This phenomenon happens because the approach combines the feature vectors from the image and text modalities into a single vector 
for classification. However, this method fail to capture the subtle and complex relationships (Yu et al., 2022) between the modalities 
and introduces noise since it treats them as independent sources of information. As shown in Fig 1(a) and (b), there are subtle dif­
ferences between the post and the generated image caption. In Fig 1(a), the news post states that “Biden signs into law Democrats’ 
wide-ranging climate change, health care and tax bill,” however, the accompanying image shows the photo of the former president, Barack 
Obama probably signing a landmark health care bill in 2010, different on what the post expresses. On a closer look at the image, Biden 
can be seen. In the second example, Fig 1(b), the post purports that “A brave driver tows a wheeler during hurricane Katrina” while the 
image generated caption shows that “A truck and a wheeler parked in a parking lot next to a body of water”. In the first example, Fig 1(a), 
the post of the text and image captions shows subtle inconsistent and do not match the context, which could be a sign of fake news. In 
this case, detecting fake news may require careful analysis of the text and the image. In Fig 1(b), while the post indicates that the 
wheeler is being towed, it is not shown in the picture. Thus, the text and the image caption reveal some subtle inconsistencies. We can 
infer discrepancies between the generated image caption and the actual content of the image, such as the absence of key individuals or 
objects mentioned may influence effective multimodal fake news detection. 
As social media remains a popular medium for online users to share their views and thoughts, images often accompany text sur­
rounding them. Image captions, thus, can be a helpful feature in fake news detection. Image captioning enables the representation of an 
image in textual form (Wu & Mebane, 2022) and may generate valuable context and information for understanding and decoding the 
image. In this study, we refer to image captions as the textual descriptions of the image content, and we utilize them as a substitute 
rather than a supplement to enhance the interaction between the modalities. This approach is particularly relevant in fake news 
detection, where images may be unrelated to the textual information or manipulated to support false claims. Generating and analyzing 
the image captions can help identify patterns of misinformation and disinformation characterizing fake news. Furthermore, although 
images themselves do not directly authenticate news content, they define significant issues in people’s daily lives that can stimulate 
conversations because they simulate human image interpretation (Al-Malla et al., 2022). The advancement of visual technology has 
facilitated augmentation of images with text, enabling models to extract semantic relationships between images and text, thus 
enhancing multimodal analysis and understanding. 
This paper addresses the above challenges by proposing a unified Complementary Attention Fusion with an Optimized Deep Neural 
Network (CAF-ODNN) for multimodal fake news detection. First, CAF employs image captioning to represent images semantically, 
allowing bidirectional complementary attention between modalities based on a scaled dot product to learn fine-grained correlations. 
Then, a dedicated alignment and normalization component is incorporated to calibrate fused representations based on channel 
1 https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/man-dies-after-ingesting-chloroquine-attempt-prevent-coronavirus-n1167166 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
3
statistics, ensuring the semantics are preserved across modalities during the interaction, thus improving upon the simple concatenation 
and averaging used in existing fusion approaches. To improve end-to-end feature extraction, an Optimized Deep Neural Network 
(ODNN) that exploits compositional learning is implemented. ODNN is designed with three fully connected layers to learn higher-level 
representations from CAF-fused features. Model parameters are then systematically tuned beyond standard random search techniques 
to identify configurations, maximizing feature quality and detection accuracy. 
The main contributions of this paper are:  
- We propose a novel unified Complementary Attention Fusion (CAF) for multimodal fake news detection that captures subtle cross- 
modal relationships. CAF introduces image captioning to represent images semantically, allowing bidirectional complementary 
attention between modalities based on a scaled dot product to learn fine-grained correlations. A dedicated alignment and 
normalization component is incorporated to calibrate fused representations based on channel statistics, ensuring the semantics are 
preserved across modalities during the interaction, thus improving upon the simple concatenation used in existing fusion 
approaches. 
- We propose an Optimized Deep Neural Network (ODNN) for end-to-end refined feature extraction. The ODNN exploits compo­
sitional learning designed with three fully connected layers to learn higher-level representations from CAF-fused features. Model 
parameters are then systematically tuned beyond standard random search techniques to identify configurations, maximizing 
feature quality and detection accuracy.  
- We evaluate the proposed approach for accuracy, recall, F1 score, and precision on four benchmark datasets to validate the 
detection efficiency. 
2. Related work 
2.1. Fake news detection using single modality 
A single-modality approach to fake news detection relies on information from a single source to identify and capture rich latent 
features. For example, methods that use texts extract semantic or statistical features from news articles to detect fake news. From this 
viewpoint, Ma et al. (2018) proposed a recursive neural network to identify fake news on X (formely Twitter) platform. Based on the 
hierarchical nature of tweets, the authors considered hidden signals within their structure. On the other hand, Mohtarami et al. (2018) 
introduced a memory network to determine the authenticity of claims. The method combined the strengths of recurrent and con­
volutional networks to capture temporal and local dependencies in the input data. The model also included a novel similarity and 
filtering component that minimized irrelevant information in related claims, resulting in improved performance of the memory 
network. Yu et al. (2017) proposed a supervised learning model incorporating a convolutional neural network (CNN) to extract and 
classify features from news articles. In addition to the text, it has also been demonstrated that images can be used as a single modality 
feature to identify fake information (Choras et al., 2018; Cao et al., 2020). Visual methods rely on the assumption that visual cues and 
patterns offer valuable insights into the information veracity. For example, Qi et al. (2019) introduced a model incorporating pix­
el–level and frequency-level features to identify fake news. With the complementary information provided by these features, the model 
Fig. 1. (a) and (b): Fake news relies on subtle differences between the text and image. Harvesting such information can contribute to effective 
multimodal detection and help eliminate noise in multimodal fusion. 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
4
gained understanding of the visual content, strengthening the model’s ability to detect fake news. Steinebach et al. (2019) presented a 
novel technique that involved extracting image features and employing an indexing technique to compare and verify image 
authenticity using a mesh verifier. While these methods prove effective, they primarily focus on event-level detection that relies on 
event flags. Event flags involve monitoring the spread of fake news over time; hence, they are resource-intensive and time-consuming, 
limiting scalability and practicality. The model, may also lack a comprehensive understanding of fake news since it focuses on a 
specific modality. 
Several temporal and network dynamic-based models have also been used to distinguish between fake and credible news. Temporal 
models (Li et al., 2022; Gong et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Alharbi et al., 2023) considers the sequence of events and interactions within a 
network to gain a deeper understanding and determine how news articles or social media posts propagate and evolve. This phe­
nomenon helps the models identify characteristics distinctive to fake news dissemination. For instance, Li et al. (2023) reconstructed a 
network based on the infection potential energy and incorporated a source location method that considers rumor propagation cen­
trality and diffusion tendency. On the other hand, Zhang et al. (2022) proposed a heuristic algorithm to enhance the influence of a 
dynamic GCN (Graph Convolutional Network) network by introducing a leader-fake labeling mechanism. Based on the network to­
pology, the algorithm incorporated adaptive layers to obtain representations of the network nodes and selected seed nodes for training 
the model. Even though the above methods demonstrate the importance of incorporating network context and relationships between 
nodes for more effective fake news detection, they may suffer from limited generalizability to different datasets and contexts. Addi­
tionally, some of these approaches are computationally expensive and fail to incorporate multimodal information in their detection 
tasks, limiting their effectiveness in capturing complex relationships between different modalities. 
2.2. Multimodal fake news detection 
2.2.1. Detection based on multimodal features 
Early multimodal approaches to fake news recognition combined different multimodal features to enhance detection accuracy. 
These methods were primarily based on the complementary nature of media, such as text, images, and metadata to capture more 
comprehensive and robust features (Wang et al., 2018; Singhal et al., 2019; Khattar et al., 2019; Armin et al., 2021). Wang et al. 
(2018), for example, proposed an EANN model that combined text-CNN and VGG-19 to improve the correlation between modalities. 
Khattar et al. (2019) introduced variational encoders to learn probabilistic latent variables and enhance the correlation between 
different modalities. These approaches effectively demonstrate the benefits of integrating multiple modalities for fake news detection. 
Besides, Jin et al. (2017) developed a multimodal deep-learning model that combined text, image, and social properties using a 
combined CNN and RNN networks. The multimodal features extracted were then fused via a multimodal fusion layer to produce a 
combined representation. This approach, however, did not incorporate the similarity features of images or social engagement into 
analysis. More recently, Armin et al. (2021) designed a multimodal framework incorporating diverse information with different levels 
of abstraction. In addition to textual and visual content, the model exploited user comments and metadata. Then, fusing the modalities 
in phases was adopted to preserve the modality’s intrinsic structure. These studies demonstrates that combining different modalities 
improves detection accuracy. However, simply fusing image and text features may not provide reliable information in all instances 
because text and image are not often correlated. 
2.2.2. Detection based on multimodal consistency 
The practice of including unrelated images with textual posts has gained prominence in the creation of multimodal fake news. 
Hence, in recent years, researchers have sought to identify the level of multimodal consistency between text and visual components in 
a post (Zhang et al., 2023) (Xiong et al., 2023) (Meel & Vishwakarma, 2021) (Wu et al., 2023) to mitigate the impact of such deceptive 
content. A SAFE model was proposed by Zhou et al. (2020) that considered similarity measurement when evaluating the consistency of 
multimodal information. On the other hand, Xue et al. (2021) presented Multimodal Consistency Neural Network (MCNN) that in­
tegrated a similarity measurement technique to assess the correlation between text and images. Separate networks were used to extract 
features from the textual and visual modalities and then mapped into a shared feature space through weight sharing. An essential 
feature of this model was the incorporation of a similarity measurement module that calculated the cosine similarity between the 
textual and visual features. While these methods have demonstrated success in multimodal fake news detection, they may encounter 
challenges in capturing intricate relationships between different modalities or handling missing modalities. They are also susceptible 
to noise. For instance, if inconsistencies arise in the predictions made by various modalities due to noise or errors in feature extraction, 
the model’s performance is adversely affected. 
2.3. Multimodal fusion 
Majority of feature fusion algorithms are based on concatenation (Singhal et al., 2019) (Ma et al., 2019), in which features from the 
textual and visual modes are combined into a single vector and classified using a neural network or a support vector machine. 
However, this approach has limitations in capturing the complex relationships between the textual and visual modalities since it treats 
text and visuals as separate sources of information. For example, Nguyen et al. (2019) concatenated document features derived from 
Word2vec, user events, TF-IDF, and node2vec and fed them into fake news detection algorithm. However, the fusion technique applied 
did not consider feature interaction. Shu et al. (2019) and Zhang et al. (2019) improved the fusion technique by exploiting the 
attention mechanism. This technique enabled the model to focus on the interaction of posts and comments, user profiles, and be­
haviors. However, the method relied primarily on the collaboration of partial and local features rather than global ones. 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
5
Fig. 2. The proposed CAF-ODNN framework. The Image translator engine comprises a ViT encoder that extracts images as a sequence of patches and a GPT-2 decoder that generates quality image 
captions. The image captions and the posts are then embedded using a text encoder and passed to the Similarity Evaluator to measure feature similarity. The Complementary Attention Fusion (CAF) 
applies bidirectional attention to learn fine-grained correlations between the image captions and the text. The fused features are passed to the alignment module for calibration. ODNN improves feature 
extraction by learning higher-level representations from CAF-fused features and maximizes feature quality and detection accuracy. 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
6
There has been a growing interest in deep learning methods that employ different modules to capture multimodal features (Zhou 
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Kumari & Ekbal, 2021; Xue et al., 2021; Ni et al. 2022). These methods also utilize various fusion 
approaches to combine multimodal features for evaluation. For example, Zhou et al. (2020) presented a multimodal learning 
framework to enhance the correlation between text and visual features. The approach entailed extracting features from textual and 
visual, and integrating them through a fusion layer incorporating a loss function based on the semantic distance between the two. Song 
et al. (2021) improved the correlation between multimodal features using a Cross-Attention and Recurrent Multimodal Network 
(CARMN). The model utilized a fusion layer and cross-attention mechanisms to capture the correlation between the textual and visual 
characteristics. However, the technique failed to account for fine-grained relationships between individual features within each 
modality. Kumari and Ekbal (2021) leveraged the Attention-based Multimodal Fusion model with Bayesian optimization (AMFB) to 
maximize the correlation between heterogeneous features in multimodal learning context. An essential characteristics of the model 
was the assignment mechanism that rationed optimal properties to each modality. For example, the Bayesian optimized each feature 
based on the correlation with the other modalities. Xue et al. (2021) proposed a framework for multiple modes that considered the 
consistency of multimodal information and generated general characteristics of social media posts. Though the model was effective, it 
required feature optimization at the fusion level to standardize different multimodal information. Ni et al. (2022) introduced a 
collaborative learning approach that combined a relationship representation graph with a two-level attention mechanism. The model 
facilitated interactions among nodes in a mutual representation network. However, it did not explicitly highlight the heterogeneity of 
features. 
Even though the above methods improve cross-modal correlation, they still have some limitations. The concatenation of features 
results in a shallow network since the approach fails to choose meaningful features and also introduces noise in the detection algo­
rithm. In addition, employing diverse modules to capture and fuse multimodal elements make the model sensitive to noise in feature 
extraction, inhibiting the model to capture fine-grained relationships between individual features within each modality. This limi­
tation can result in the model overlooking subtle characteristics that could contribute valuable information for fake news detection. In 
this work, we introduce image captioning to represent images semantically, allowing bidirectional complementary attention between 
modalities to learn fine-grained correlations. A dedicated alignment and normalization component is employed to calibrate fused 
representations based on channel statistics. This strategy ensures the semantics are preserved across modalities during the interaction, 
improving simple concatenation used in existing fusion approaches. We improve feature extraction by using an optimized deep neural 
network that exploits compositional learning. The model is designed with three fully connected layers to learn higher-level repre­
sentations from CAF-fused features. Model parameters are then systematically tuned beyond standard random search techniques to 
identify configurations, maximizing feature quality and detection accuracy. 
3. Methods 
3.1. Model framework 
Multimodal information presents a challenge for fusion since the modalities typically have different representations and di­
mensions. The challenge arises because text, images, videos, and other modalities can contain different types of information that may 
not be directly comparable. This section provides a detailed explanation of our proposed framework, as shown in Fig 2. 
3.2. Image translator engine 
The image translator engine generates image captions. The concept is that captions help reduce the semantic gap between the 
image and the text modality. An encoder-decoder architecture is used in the module to convert the image into a latent representation 
with a textual description. The captions are generated by rescaling images to 224 × 224 resolution and using a beam search with four 
beams. In this study, ViT-GPT- 2 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) is used. It is a publicly available image-to-text captioning pipeline consisting 
of a Vision Transformer (ViT) neural network as an encoder and a GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2020) neural network as a decoder. The 
ViT-GPT 2 model is trained on over 330,000 annotated images from the MS COCO captions dataset (Chen et al., 2015). The primary 
benefit of using ViT-GPT-2 is that it allows end-to-end training of the model, resulting in a better representation of the image features 
and the caption generated. Additionally, the self-attention mechanisms in ViT captures long-range dependencies between different 
parts of the image, which is useful in generating more accurate and detailed captions. Given I as an input image with width w and 
height h, the ViT encoder processes the image to generate a set of K feature vectors denoted as: 
F = (f1, …, fK)
(1)  
where each feature vector fi ϵ Rd has a dimension of d 
The GPT-2 encoder takes the set of feature vectors F as the input and generates a caption, which is represented as a sequence of 
tokens as: 
C = (c1, . .., cT)
(2)  
where each token ci represents a symbol or word in the caption. 
The probability of generating the sequence C given the feature vectors F is achieved by: 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
7
P(C|F) = P(c1| F) ∗P(c2 | f1, …, fK, c1) ∗… ∗P(cT | f1, …, fK, c1, …, cT −1
(3)  
where P (ci
⃒⃒f1, …, fK, c1, …, ci−1) denotes the conditional probability of generating the i −th token given the previous tokens and 
the feature vector. 
The generated image caption is represented in a space compatible with the post’s textual features. 
3.3. Embeddings 
The image translator engine is first exploited to generate the text caption describing the image. Then, the text is encoded into 512 
high-dimensional embedding vectors to represent the input strings. A Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) (Cer et al., 2018) is employed 
which comprises two main components: a sentence encoder and a transformer-based encoder. Using this strength, the semantic 
meaning of text and more complex relationships between words and phrases can be captured since USE considers the context of a text. 
The text is encoded into a fixed-length vector representation that captures the semantic meaning of the text. Given t as an input text 
sequence, and h an output representation generated by the USE model, the sentence encoder first learn a fixed-length vector repre­
sentation u(t)for the input text sequence t exploiting convolutional layers as shown below: 
u(t) = f([c1, …, ck])
(4)  
Where ci denotes the i −th of the convolutional layer and f is a non-linear activation function. 
The transformer-based encoder then takes the fixed length vector representation u(t) as input and generates the final output 
representation h(t) using self- attention mechanism: 
h(t) = g([ e1, …, en])
(5)  
where ei denotes the i −th output of the transformer-based encoder, and g is a multi-layer pecerptron that maps concatenated output 
vectors to the final representation h(t) which is a fixed length vector capturing the semantic meaning of the input text sequence. 
3.4. Similarity evaluator 
The model generate text ( stext) and image caption (simage) embeddings separately and compares the two embeddings to determine 
similarity. The algorithm can capture the meaning of the sentence based on context, intent, and other semantic nuances by considering 
the evidence of embedding similarity. Cosine similarity computes text ( stext) and image caption (simage) embeddings is used to capture 
their respective features in a numerical form using Eq. (6). Each dimension (i.e. from 1 to n) of the embedding is iterated. For each 
dimension, the corresponding elements of stext and simage and sum of their products are multiplied. Furthermore, the length of the 
embeddings is determined (Eq. (7), Eq. (8)). The idea is that the length of the embeddings serves as useful features for assessing the 
authenticity of news articles. For instance, if the lengths of both the text and image caption embeddings are large, it indicates that the 
textual and image captions features are relatively strong and well-represented. This may suggest a higher likelihood of the news article 
being authentic. On the other hand, if the lengths of the embeddings are relatively small, it could indicate weak or insufficient rep­
resentation of the textual and visual information. Finally, the cosine similarity with the sigmoid function is computed as shown in Eq. 
(9). A sigmoid function is included to ensure that the resulting similarity value falls within the range of 0 to 1. It is desirable to utilize 
this mapping since it provides a more interpretable and normalized measure. In this normalization step, the magnitudes of the em­
beddings are considered, ensuring similarity value are not biased by the lengths of the vectors. A sigmoid function maps the value to a 
range between 0 and 1, providing a probabilistic interpretation of the similarity score and making it easier to interpret and compare 
similarity values across pairs of text and image. The derived similarity value serves as an input to the complementary fusion module. 
dotproduct =
∑
n
i=1
stext[i] . simage [i]
(6)  
where stext[i] and simage [i] represents the elements in the i th dimension of stext and simage respectively. The index ranges from 1 to n, 
where n is the dimensionality of the embeddings. Each dimension corresponds to a specific feature of the text or image caption. 
‖ stext‖=
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑
n
j=1
stext[j]2
√
√
√
√
(7)  
‖ simage‖=
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑
n
j=1
simage[j]2
√
√
√
√
(8)  
where stext[j]2 and simage[j]2 represent the elements or values in the j-th dimension of the stext and simage respectively. The index j ranges 
from 1 to n, where n is the dimensionality of the embeddings. 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
8
cos
(
stext, simage
)
= σ
(
stext . simage
||stext|
⃒⃒. ‖ simage|
⃒⃒
)
(9)  
where σ denotes the sigmoid function that maps its input value to a value between 0 and 1. It is defined as =
1
1+e−x . ‖ stext‖ and ‖ simage‖
denotes the lengths or magnitudes of the text and image embeddings, respectively. 
3.5. Complementary attention fusion 
Instead of concatenating modalities to form a final representation in the fusion process, we use a scaled dot product attention 
technique to fuse the modalities. This technique involves calculating the output of a set of queries Q to a set of keys K and values V. The 
dimensions of the keys are denoted as dk, and the dimensions of the values are denoted as dv. The output is calculated as follows: 
Attention (Q, K, V) = Softmax
(QKT
̅̅̅̅
dk
√
)
V
(10) 
In the above calculation, the softmax function is applied to the scaled dot product of the queries Q and the keys K, divided by the 
key’s dimensions. The process produces a set of weights to combine the values V to produce the output linearly. 
First, the textual features set (h1, . . . , hn) is represented as the queries Q, while the image caption features(Ic, . . . , Iw) are 
represented as the keys K and values V. The attention mechanism is used to compute the attention weights for each textual feature for 
the image caption features: 
h′
i =
∑
w
j=0
ai
jIj
(11)  
For each textual featureh1, the attention weights ai
j are computed using the softmax function applied to the dot product hi and each 
image caption feature Ij. 
ai
j = softmax
(
hiIT
j
)
(12) 
The set of textual features is (h′
1, . . . , h′
n). Finally, these integrated features are averaged to obtain a single feature vector ftext 
representing the entire textual input. 
ftext = average
(
h′
1, . . . , h′
n
)
(13)  
The image caption feature set Ic, . . . , Iw) is represented as the queries Q, while the textual features (h1, . . . , hn) are represented 
as the keys K and values V. The attention mechanism is used to compute the attention weights for each image caption feature for the 
textual features. The image caption representations combined with textual representations are thus outputted as below: 
I′
j =
∑
n
i=0
aj
ihi
(14)  
For each image caption feature I′
j, the attention weights aj
i are computed using the softmax function applied to the dot product h1 
and each textual featurehi. These attention weights represent how much each textual feature contributes to the representation of the 
image caption feature. 
aj
i = softmax
(
IjhT
i
)
(15) 
The set of textual features is (I′
1, . . . , I′
w). Finally, these integrated features are averaged to obtain a single feature vector ftext 
representing the entire image caption input. 
fImageCaption = average
(
I′
1, . . . , I′
w
)
(16)  
Overall, this approach takes the advantage of the complementary strengths of text and image modalities and effectively allows the 
model to integrate information from both modalities. 
3.6. Alignment and normalization 
The alignment and normalization component aligns and normalizes the text and image captions by calculating the mean along the 
channel dimension (the dimension of the feature tensor that captures different aspects of the data) for each channel separately (Eqs 
(17) and 18). The idea is that when text and image caption features are combined, different channels may represent diverse aspects of 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
9
the data. Therefore, the model capture the statistical properties specific to each modality or channel by calculating the mean sepa­
rately. Calculating the mean value for normalization ensures the model aligns and normalizes the features within each modality 
independently. In this manner, modality-specific biases are removed, and the distributions of the features are aligned, enabling 
effective fusion. The variance along the channel dimension for each modality is then determined separately (Eqs (19) and 20) to 
complement the mean calculation and provide insights into the variability of the features. Performing this step allows the model to 
identify the variances unique to each modality and align the feature distributions more accurately during normalization. The model 
eliminates the modality-specific biases, scale differences, and feature variations with Eqs (21) and 22 and f. This process facilitates 
effective fusion by ensuring the features have consistent scales and distributions across modalities. Finally, text and image captions 
features are concatenated into a unified single representation Eq. (23). This concatenation preserves separate modality-specific in­
formation while ensuring their alignment. In addition, it ensures consistency in the features’ scales and distributions in the subsequent 
modules. Given the text feature tensor (T) of shape (batchs, textd) and the image caption feature tensor (I) (batchs, captiond) the features 
are aligned and normalized as below: 
T =
1
batchs
∑
batchs
i=1
Ti, :
(17)  
I =
1
batchs
∑
batchs
i=1
Ii, :
(18)  
σ2
T =
1
batchs
∑
batchs
i=1
(Ti, : −
T)2
(19)  
σ2
I =
1
batchs
∑
batchs
i=1
(Ii, : −
I)2
(20)  
̂T i , : =
Ti , : −T
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
σ2
T + ϵ
√
(21)  
̂I i , : =
Ii , : −I
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
σ2
I + ϵ
√
(22)  
Normalizedf = (̂T, ̂I)
(23)  
where σ2
T and σ2
I is the text and image caption features calculated along the channel dimension. They are tensor of shape textd and 
captiond representing variance value for each channel in the text and image caption features. i represents the instant index, and (:) 
denotes all elements along the respective dimension. ε is a small value added for numerical stability to avoid division by zero. 
3.7. Optimized deep neural network 
To this point, the model has obtained the text’s attention-aggregated representation for the image caption, denoted as RC, and the 
image caption’s aggregated representation for the text denoted as RT. These two representations capture the most relevant features of 
each modality. After aligning and normalizing the two features are concatenated to form a multimodal representation of a given post. 
The fused representation combines the strengths of both modalities and provides a more comprehensive representation of the post. An 
optimized deep neural network is designed to extract deep features from the fused features. It contains three fully connected layers 
with different parameters. The first fully connected layer contains 256 neurons in a hidden layer with a ReLU activation function, 
followed by a 0.5 dropout. The concept is to project high-dimensional fused input into a lower-dimensional hidden space, allowing the 
model to learn an abstracted nonlinear representation of captions and text modes. The second and third fully connected layers have 
128 and 64 neurons in a hidden layer, respectively. These layers continue to project features into lower-dimensional space, allowing 
the model to discover discovery global, high-level patterns related to real and fake classes. Both layers contain ReLU activation 
function, a dropout, and a batch normalization layer. The batch normalization layer enables the model to learn independently from 
each ODNN layer. A ReLU activation function enhances the model’s ability to learn nonlinear features and decision boundaries when 
classifying. It also prevents gradients from vanishing and exploding. The ODNN incorporates three dropout layers, after the ReLU 
activation function in the first fully connected layer and after batch normalization in the second and third layers. The aim is to prevent 
overfitting, improve generalization error, and reduce training time. The model incorporates Adam optimizer to generate adaptive 
estimates, which are computationally efficient. The model uses an initial learning rate of 0.005 to maximize computational efficiency. 
The fully connected layers enable the model to capture subtle correlations between captions and text semantics in the CAF module by 
combining simpler features learned in earlier layers to extract higher-level abstracted features. We implement a grid search to optimize 
the model’s hyperparameters (Pedregosa et al., 2011). It is necessary to tune the Hyperparameters of a model before training it to 
control the learning process. Optimizing the hyperparameters enhances the performance. The grid search involves experimenting with 
every combination of values of the hyperparameters to find the most appropriate blend for training the model. While it effectively tests 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
10
various values and quickly finds a near-optimal combination, grid search does not guarantee the best parameters. Consequently, grid 
search is time-consuming, especially when many hyperparameters are involved. We selected a few parameters to optimize to avoid this 
situation. These parameters include neurons, epochs, and batch sizes. We chose the parameters based on their impact on the model’s 
performance. It was more efficient to find the best combination by selecting a small number of hyperparameters to optimize. As shown 
in Table 1, the number of neurons in the hidden layer, the optimized epochs, and batch sizes were considered.  
- Neurons: A neuron is a unit that receives input from the preceding layer and produces output to the next layer. Neuron in each 
layer receives input from neurons in previous layer, calculate, and generate an output dispersed to neurons in the subsequent 
layers.  
- Optimizers: Optimizers can be tuned to improve the model’s efficiency during training. They adjusts the model’s weights and 
biases during training to minimize the loss function. The loss function determines the disparity between the predicted output and 
the actual output, and the optimizer’s goal is to reduce this difference. Different optimization methods, such as Adam, RMSprop, 
and Nadam, update weights and biases differently. We tuned three optimization techniques: Adams, Root Mean Square Propagation 
(RMSprop), and Nadam.  
- Batch size: This parameter can significantly impact the training process and the model’s performance. A large batch size can 
reduce the noise in the gradient estimation and result in a more stable convergence, but it may also require more memory, slowing 
the training process. In contrast, a small batch expedite the training process, but leads to a less stable convergence due to a noisy 
gradient approximation. We used batch sizes between 16 and 512. However, a batch size of 32 is a commonly used value.  
- Epochs: This variable determines the number of successful authorizations in the training dataset. An optimal neural network 
performance requires the correct number of epochs. A small number of epochs causes under-fitting since the model fails to learn 
from the training data, whereas a large number of epochs results in overfitting because the model learns noise as well, resulting in 
poor performance on the test dataset. We used several epochs to update the model’s weights and avoid overfitting. We incorporated 
a grid search to find the best value for epochs. 
3.8. Classification 
The softmax function converts the output of the fully connected layer into a probability distribution over the two classes of fake and 
real news. The predicted probability vector is represented by: 
c = softmax(Wfm + b)
(24)  
where c = (c0, c1) denote the predicted vector, and c0 and c1 denote the predicted ground truth, 1 being fake news and 0 being real 
news. 
The binary cross-entropy loss function is given by: 
lc = [ylogc0 + (1 −y)logc1)
(25)  
where y ϵ {0, 1} represents the news label. 
4. Experiments 
4.1. Datasets 
We conducted an empirical analysis on four datasets, GossipCO, PolitiFact, Fakeddit and Pheme to validate the effectiveness of the 
proposed model. Table 2 displays the statistical information for the datasets:  
- FakeNewsNet (Shu et al., 2020) is a popular dataset for fake news detection. It contains two datasets, PolitiFact and GossipCO. A 
PolitiFact dataset contains tweets related to posts published on the PolitiFact website. The PolitiFact website is a fact-checking 
website where journalist experts evaluate political claims as fake or real. This dataset consists of tweets mentioning claims and 
statements made by politicians, and other public figures. To create the FakeNewsNet collection, (Shu et al., 2020) used the 
headlines of these posts as queries to collect relevant tweets. On the other hand, GossipCO is based on tweets collected using the 
headlines of articles published and annotated on the GossipCO website. 
Table 1 
Optimization Hyperparameters.  
Hyperparameter 
Values 
Neurons 
128, 256, 512 
Optimizer 
Adam, Nadam, RMSprop 
Batch size 
10, 30, 60, 90 
Epochs 
10, 20, 30, 40, 60, 70  
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
11
- Fakeddit (Nakamura et al., 2020) is a dataset specifically designed for multimodal fake news analysis. This dataset contains one 
million samples, including both false and credible information. The dataset is categorized into six categories with binary ground 
truths for distinguishing between real and fake news for classification tasks. Furthermore, it offers more fine-grained classification 
options with three and six-class classifications, providing additional granularity in misinformation analysis.  
- The Pheme (Zubiaga et al., 2016) dataset comprises Twitter threads that revolve around nine notable news events, such as the Siege 
of Sydney, Charlie Hebdo, the Ottawa shooting, and more. Each news thread consists of a tweet that serves as the news source. In 
our analysis, we leverage the original tweet from the news to perform the classification task. 
In the four datasets, we prepare the training, the validation, and test subsets. We adopt Accuracy (A), Precision (P), Recall (R), and 
F1 score as our evaluation metrics. Table 2 shows the statistics of our datasets. 
4.2. Implementation details 
We utilize a PyTorch environment with TensorFlow, Keras, and transformers libraries to facilitate the creation, deployment, and 
utilization of the pre-trained Vit-GPT-2 model. We use a Universal Sentence Encoder, a transformer-based encoder to encode 
contextualized text and captions generated from the image in 512-dimensional space. Three fully connected layers containing 128 and 
64 neurons are incorporated into the model with corresponding activation functions (ReLU) for effective feature extraction. A 0.5 
dropout rate is set between the ODNN layers to mitigate overfitting, and we leverage Batch Normalization and Adam optimizer. The 
model incorporates a sigmoid activation function as a classification layer. The implementation is accelerated using CUDA 11.0 and 
executed on a GPU with 12 GB of memory. We processed data in batches of size 128 to maximize computational efficiency. The dataset 
is stratified into training (70 %), testing (20 %), and validation (10 %) sets, ensuring representative distribution across the three sets. 
We implement a learning rate scheduler to optimize the learning process, with a scheduler reducing the learning rate dynamically if the 
validation error increases for two consecutive epochs. This reduction continues until the model reaches a minimum learning rate, 
improving the overall effectiveness of the training performance. We implement an early stopping mechanism to prevent unnecessary 
training. If the model’s performance or validation error does not improve after ten epochs, the training process is terminated early, 
saving computational resources. We use gradient clipping to stabilize the gradient values and control parameter updates during 
training. This technique prevents gradients from exploding, which can results in potential issues. We calculate loss using Cross Entropy 
Loss. This loss function standardizes the impact of different classes by assigning less attention to the input samples. It also aids in 
achieving balanced performance across class distributions. 
4.3. Baselines 
To validate the proposed model’s effectiveness, we compared the experimental results of the four real datasets as follows:- 
4.3.1. GossipCO and PolitiFact datasets 
We adopt the following baselines for GossipCO and PolitiFact datasets  
- DEFD (Obaid et al., 2022) is an approach that employs an ensemble of deep-learning models based on the same feature extractor. 
Each learner focuses on a distinct aspect of the input news using an attention mechanism and a loss function.  
- Silva et al. (2021) a multimodal method for fake news detection in cross-domain news datasets that learns from two independent 
embedding spaces to capture domain-specific and cross-domain information. 
- TRANSFAKE (Jing et al., 2021) integrates multimodal signals, such as text, images, and comments. A transformer-based archi­
tecture is used to extract features from text and image. Further, the model incorporates user comments to enhance the detection 
process.  
- DEFD-SSL (Obaid et al., 2023) utilizes an ensemble model to exploit quality pseudo labels. Moreover, it mitigates bias towards the 
majority category by assessing the class distribution to solve the challenge of imbalanced classes.  
- FR-Detect (Jarrahi & Safari, 2023) is a multimodal model for efficient multimodal fake news detection. It includes 
publisher-related features in the detection process.  
- SBERT(Madhusudhan et al., 2020) utilizes BERT to extract context-rich textual features and ResNet to extract image features. A 
simple concatenation process combines the extracted features. As a second approach, the model incorporates visual attention, 
allowing it to focus specifically on the most relevant regions within the image. 
Table 2 
Statistics of our four datasets.   
Veracity 
GossipCO 
PolitiFact 
Fakeddit 
Pheme   
Text 
Caption 
Image 
Text 
Caption 
Image 
Text 
Caption 
Image 
Text 
Caption 
Image  
Real 
1003 
1003 
1003 
280 
280 
280 
1399 
1399 
1399 
1086 
1086 
1086 
Category 
Fake 
1085 
1085 
1085 
320 
320 
320 
1650 
1650 
1650 
1200 
1200 
1200  
Total 
2088 
2088 
2088 
600 
600 
600 
3049 
3049 
3049 
2286 
2286 
2286  
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
12
- SAFE (Zhou et al., 2020) is a multimodal neural network that extracts textual and visual features separately for news represen­
tation. It models the relationship between the extracted features on different modalities to predict fake news. 
4.3.2. Fakeddit and Pheme datasets 
We adopted the following baselines for Fakeddit and Pheme datasets: -  
- MIN (Zou et al., 2023b) integrates semantic-level image and text representations. The model also incorporates entities and external 
knowledge. It combines text, images, entities, and external knowledge using a three-level co-attention network.  
- Fakefind (Sengan et al., 2023) is a method in which convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are combined with recurrent neural 
networks (RNNs) to effectively fuse multimodal information.  
- CMAC (Zou et al., 2023a) method uses adversarial learning to align the latent feature distribution of text and image. Moreover, 
contrastive learning is employed to align the feature distribution in multimodal samples of the same category. The combination of 
adversarial and contrastive learning allows the model to obtain robust multimodal fusion representations.  
- FDMCE (Shao et al., 2022) combines two single-modality classifiers and incorporates a similarity classifier to determine feature 
similarity across modalities. An integrity classifier is also used in the model to leverage integral multimodal information.  
- FakedBits (Sharma et al., 2023) is a deep neural multi-modal network that utilizes EfficientNet-B0 and distilBERT to process visual 
and textual information. A feature embedding process is performed for each channel individually, followed by a fusion process at 
the final classification layer.  
- KMAGCN (Qian et al., 2021) combines textual information, knowledge concepts, and visual -information within a unified 
framework to capture semantic representations. The model effectively learns features by representing posts as graphs and utilizing 
a knowledge-aware multimodal adaptive graph learning approach.  
- CCD (Chen et al., 2023) is a technique that incorporates causal intervention to mitigate the impact of psycholinguistic bias, which 
may introduce misleading correlations between text features and new labels for multimodal fake news detection. 
4.4. Results and analysis 
Tables 3 and 4 present our method’s overall performance. According to Table 3, CAF-ODNN outperforms baselines in accuracy, 
recall, and F1 values on the GossipCO dataset. In particular, it improves accuracy by 0.032 % points, recall by 0.508 % points, and F1 
score by 0.399 % points compared to the previous best baselines. However, there is a slight decrease in precision by 0.062 % points. On 
the other hand, the model exhibits performance improvements of 0.056 % points, 0.215 % points, and 0.147 % points in accuracy, 
precision, and F1 score, respectively on the PolitiFact dataset. The SAFE method achieves an accuracy rate of 0.838 % and 0.874 % on 
the GossipCO and PolitiFact datasets, respectively. The approach by Silva et al. (2021), considered the best-performing baseline on the 
GossipCO dataset, achieves a performance of 0.842 % in accuracy. However, its performance on the PolitiFact dataset decreases by 
0.01 % points. This observation suggests that the GossipCO dataset is larger than the PolitiFact dataset, providing the model access to 
more training instances compared to the PolitiFact dataset. DEFD performs better on the PolitiFact dataset in terms of accuracy. One 
reason is that DEFD may be more effective because it utilizes multimodal information, which improves the model’s performance. 
Additionally, it employs a focal loss function and diverse learners to enhance accuracy on the minority class (i.e., fake news), enabling 
more effective detection of fake news. TRANSFAKE consistently performs better, achieving 0.831 % and 0.834 % accuracy on the 
GossipCO and PolitiFact datasets, respectively, compared to other baselines. However, it shows a slight decrease in accuracy by 0.032 
% and 0.055 % points on the GossipCO and PolitiFact datasets, respectively, compared to CAF-ODNN. This performance demonstrates 
that incorporating users’ comments and sentiments enriches multimodal features, and utilizing a transformer for fusion improves the 
performance of the fake news detection model. DEFD-SSL outperforms FR-Detect on the PolitiFact dataset by 0.039 % points. A quality 
pseudo-label ensemble model underlies the impressive performance of DEFD-SSL. An advantage of the ensemble method is that it 
considers the imbalanced nature of the data by estimating the distribution of classes, thereby eliminating bias in favor of the majority 
category. SBERT also performs better than TRANSFAKE and DEFD-SSL, demonstrating its ability to capture the relationships between 
text and images for a more comprehensive understanding and analysis. 
FDMCE’s accuracy decreases by 0.08 % points on the Fakeddit dataset and by 0.023 % points on the Pheme dataset compared to 
CCD in Table 4. It could be inferred from the model’s observation that CCD uses causal intervention and counterfactual reasoning to 
mitigate image bias and achieve superior performance compared to FDMCE. MIN model outperforms all compared baselines, achieving 
Table 3 
Comparison performance on GossipCO and PolitiFact datasets.  
Dataset 
Measure 
DEFD 
(Silva et al., 2021) 
TRANSFAKE 
DEFD-SSL 
FR-Detect 
SBERT 
SAFE 
CAF-ODNN 
GossipCO 
Acc. (%) 
0.841 
0.848 
0.831 
0.831 
0.840 
0.837 
0.838 
0.863 
Prec. (%) 
0.912 
0.822 
0.773 
0.592 
0.767 
0.855 
0.877 
0.870 
Recall (%) 
0.601 
0.797 
0.826 
0.442 
0.591 
0.945 
0.937 
0.950  
F1score (%) 
0.725 
0.808 
0.851 
0.506 
0.668 
0.898 
0.890 
0.905  
Acc. (%) 
0.855 
0.838 
0.834 
0.872 
0.833 
0.855 
0.874 
0.889 
PolitiFact 
Prec. (%) 
0.705 
0.836 
0.801 
0.730 
0.804 
0.871 
0.889 
0.920  
Recall (%) 
0.827 
0.828 
0.862 
0.826 
0.872 
0.926 
0.903 
0.841  
F1 score (%) 
0.761 
0.833 
0.820 
0.775 
0.837 
0.897 
0.896 
0.908  
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
13
0.893 % accuracy on the Fakeddit dataset. MIN appears to leverage entities and external knowledge to enhance the integration of 
image representations with their semantics, providing additional semantic information that aids in validating post-rationality. 
However, the accuracy of MIN decreases by 0.065 % points on the Pheme dataset, indicating potential dataset characteristics. The 
MIN approach, for example, might have been specifically trained to utilize entities and external knowledge that are more informative 
in the Fakeddit dataset. Therefore, when applied to the Pheme dataset, which may have distinct characteristics, the model struggles to 
effectively utilize the same entities and external knowledge, resulting in low performance. On both the Fakeddit and Pheme datasets, 
FakeBits exhibits consistent performance. This observation suggests that leveraging EfficientNet-B0, distilBERT, and embedding text 
and visual features in separate channels before final classification improves the performance of models. The CMAC and KMAGCN 
models also perform comparatively better on the Pheme dataset. This observation suggests that the models exploits counterfactual 
reasoning and attention to fuse specific features, jointly model textual information, knowledge concepts, and visual information to 
improve detection performance. Table 4 shows that the Fakefind performs better on the Pheme dataset by 0.021 % points than the 
proposed model. However, the proposed model outperforms Fakefind in Recall and F1 scores by 0.047 % and 0.014 % points, 
respectively. A possible explanation could be that the higher scores on Recall and F1 suggest that the proposed model can identify 
positive instances correctly (correctly identifying fake news). Therefore, it can capture more true positive fake news instances, even 
though there might be negligible difference in accuracy compared to Fakefind. 
In terms of datasets, the proposed model exhibits superior performance on the GossipCO, PolitiFact, Fakeddit, and Pheme datasets, 
implying its scalability and generalizability. In particular, the model achieves high level of accuracy of 0.900 % on the Fakeddit 
dataset, 0.889 % on PolitiFact, 0.879 % on Pheme, and 0.863 % on GossipCO. The variation in performance across these datasets can 
be attributed to the dataset characteristics, model architecture, and the hyperparameters used. During the model’s training process, 
these factors interact, influencing the model’s learning ability, as reflected in the changes observed over epochs. In Fig 3, we visualize 
the convergence points for each dataset. The GossipCO dataset reaches convergence at epoch 5.5, PolitiFact at epoch 9, Fakeddit at 
epoch 8, and Pheme at epoch 6, indicating the model optimally balances the training and validation losses. A small gap between the 
training and validation loss reveals that the model fits well with the training data while generalizing well to unseen validation data. 
This observation demonstrates that the model has effectively learned the underlying patterns in the training data without overfitting or 
underfitting, demonstrating its capability to capture and generalize from the dataset’s features. 
CAF-ODNN outperforms the baselines models due to its complementary attention fusion of image captions and text. The perfor­
mance of CAF-ODNN can be attributed to three key factors: first, the CAF’s complementary attention fusion technique captures subtle 
cross-modal relationships allowing the model to learn fine-grained correlations in a shared fusion space. This approach captures 
dependencies and fine-grained cross-modal interactions, ensuring accurate and semantically meaningful fusion while eliminating 
unrelated noisy features. Second, the alignment module calibrates fused features based on channel statistics, ensuring the semantics 
are preserved across modalities during the interaction mitigating feature variations and distributions. Lastly, through optimization, 
model hyperparameters are tuned for optimal performance. The optimization technique allows for the efficient feature extraction and 
enhances utilization of text and image caption information, ultimately resulting in improved accuracy. 
4.5. Error analysis 
We implemented a Receiver Operating Characteristics Curve (ROC curve) to analyze errors in the model’s classification. The ROC 
curve represents the performance of a model in binary classification. The ROC curve captures the trade-off between the False Positive 
Rate (FPR) and the True Positive Rate (TPR) at various classification points (Suratkar et al., 2020). The ROC curves are shown in Fig 4 
(a - d). In estimating the area under the ROC curve, the Area Under the Curve (AUC) quantifies the general effectiveness of the model. 
An ideal classification model has an AUC of 1, while random guesses yield an AUC of 0.5. CAF-ODNN performs well on all four datasets, 
with AUC values of 0.79 %, 0.94 %, 0.96 %, and 0.81 % for the GossipCO, PolitiFact, Fakeddit, and Pheme datasets respectively. This 
performance suggests a good balance between the TPR and FPR, establishing excellent overall classification performance. 
4.6. Ablation analysis 
To assess the performance of CAF-ODNN fusion and optimization, we conducted ablation experiments on the GossipCO, PolitiFact, 
Fakeddit, and Pheme datasets. The ablation sub-experiment results are shown in Fig 5 (a - d) and Fig 6 (a - d). In Fig 5 (a - d), CAF- 
Table 4 
Comparison performance on Fakeddit and Pheme datasets. The (–) indicates the results in the original paper were not provided, while (*) denotes 
better performance.  
Dataset 
Measure 
MIN 
Fakefind 
CMAC 
FDMCE 
FakedBits 
KMAGCN 
CCD 
CAF-ODNN 
Fakeddit 
Acc. (%) 
0.893 
0.848 
0.867 
0.804 
0.888 
0.829 
0.884 
0.900 
Prec. (%) 
– 
0.841 
0.886 
0.838 
0.852 
0.818 
0.821 
0.961 
Recall (%) 
– 
0.851 
0.896 
0.749 
0.871 
0.808 
0.781 
0.901  
F1score (%) 
0.848 
0.846 
0.884 
0.791 
0.860 
0.812 
0.808 
0.930  
Acc. (%) 
0.828 
0.900* 
0.874 
0.836 
0.863 
0.867 
0.859 
0.879 
Pheme 
Prec. (%) 
– 
0.901 
0.797 
0.846 
0.850 
0.830 
0.764 
0.884  
Recall (%) 
– 
0.901 
0.810 
0.853 
0.921 
0.775 
0.689 
0.948  
F1 score (%) 
0.805 
0.901 
0.780 
0.850 
0.890 
0.800 
0.724 
0.915  
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
14
Fig. 3. (a – d). Training and validation loss on GossipCO, PolitiFact, Fakeddit and Pheme dataset.  
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
15
Fig. 4. (a- d). ROC curve on GossipCO, PolitiFact, Fakeddit and Pheme datasets.  
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
16
Fig. 5. (a - d). Ablation analysis on GossipCO and PolitiFact datasets. CAF-ODNN* indicates the CAF is not incorporated while CAF-ODNN** incorporates the CAF.  
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
17
Fig. 6. (a – d) Ablation analysis on GossipCO and PolitiFact datasets. CAF-ODNN* indicates the ODNN is not incorporated while CAF-ODNN** incorporates the ODNN optimization.  
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
18
Fig. 7. (a - d) The graph consists of individual data points represented as dots connected by lines. Each dot represents a specific batch size and its corresponding accuracy score. The lines help visualize 
the trend in the data points, and the circular markers placed at each data point highlight the exact values of batch sizes and accuracy scores. 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
19
(caption on next page) 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
20
ODNN* indicates the exclusion of CAF fusion, while CAF-ODNN** denotes the inclusion of CAF fusion. In Fig 6 (a - d), CAF-ODNN* 
excludes the ODNN optimization, while CAF-ODNN** includes ODNN optimization. 
In Fig 5, the ablation results show that the performance of CAF-ODNN decreases without incorporating complementary fusion. For 
instance, the accuracy, recall, and F1 scores for the GossipCO decreased by 0.043 %, 0.065 %, and 0.017 % points respectively in Fig 5 
(a). The model’s performance falls by 0.058 %, 0.038 %, and 0.045 % points in accuracy, precision, and F1 scores, respectively on 
PolitiFact (Fig 5(b). Consequently, the model’s performance decreases by 0.049 %, 0.089 %, and 0.017% points in accuracy, precision, 
and F1 scores, respectively for the Fakeddit dataset in Fig 5(c). Fig 5(d) shows the decrease in accuracy, precision, and F1 scores for 
Pheme dataset by 0.037%, 0.023%, and 0.11% points, respectively. We can attribute this improved performance to three factors. 
Firstly, when the image and text posts are represented in a joint high-dimensional space, the model compares the features and extract 
visual and textual features from the data, mapping them to a joint embedding space. Secondly, the image caption attention and text 
attention mechanisms highlight relevant features in the image caption and text, respectively. This observation implies the model 
focuses on the most crucial parts of the image captions and text, disregarding irrelevant information. The attention mechanisms detect 
subtle complexities using image captions as the "post text." Image captions serve as descriptions of the content of an image and 
represent visual features in a high-dimensional space. The application of image captions as the post text enables the model to capture 
the most salient visual characteristics of the image in a semantic space that exhibits a significant correlation with textual features, 
thereby enhancing performance. Thirdly, the alignment module performs separate alignment and normalization of the text and image 
caption modalities, thereby improving the fusion process and addressing variances and feature distributions. Thus, the benefit of the 
process is eliminating noisy features, resulting in improved accuracy and semantic meaningfulness of the fusion between image 
captions and text. 
In Fig 6 (a - d), the model’s performance improves through optimization. In particular, the model improves accuracy and recall by 
0.029 % and 0.033 % points, respectively, on the GossipCO dataset. For the PolitiFact dataset, the accuracy improves by 0.031 % 
points, recall by 0.002 % points, and F1 score by 0.0018 % points. Similarly, on the Fakeddit dataset, the accuracy improves by 0.049 % 
points, recall by 0.075 % points, and F1 score by 0.063 % points. The accuracy, recall, and F1 scores of the Pheme dataset are all 
improved by 0.05 % points, 0.14 % points, and 0.103 % points, respectively. We attribute this improved performance to two factors. 
Firstly, using an optimized deep neural network enhances the efficiency of feature extraction in image captions and text by learning 
progressively fine-grained features through compositional learning using fully connected layers. Secondly, the systematic exploration 
of different combinations of hyperparameters enables the model to find the optimal configuration that maximizes performance. This 
approach leads to a more accurate and efficient model since it determines the best settings that enhance overall performance. 
4.7. Hyperparameter analysis 
We analyzed the hyperparameters, and due to space constraints, we focused on two specific hyperparameters: batch size and the 
number of epochs. 
4.7.1. Batch size 
We present the model’s performance with different batches in Fig 7 (a–d). In Fig 7(a), we observe that CAF-ODNN convergence 
occurs after several iterations with a 15-batch size for the GossipCO dataset. The model reaches its optimum point at 90 epochs for the 
PolitiFact dataset. Fakeddit and Pheme datasets converge with a batch size of 32. We draw some insights based on Fig 7 (a - d). The 
convergence at a smaller batch size suggests that the model effectively learns from smaller subsets of data. This phenomenon indicates 
that the dataset is more concentrated with relevant patterns, as seen in the GossipCO dataset. A larger batch size, as observed in the 
PolitiFact dataset, helps the model generalize better by providing more diverse samples during each update step. Hence, a larger batch 
size benefits the model by incorporating more significant sampling instances to learn underlying patterns. A moderate batch size, as 
observed in the Fakeddit and Pheme datasets, implies that the dataset exhibits characteristics that allow the model to learn efficiently. 
These datasets likely contain a balanced distribution of patterns, enabling the model to capture quality local and global patterns. 
4.7.2. Epochs 
Fig 8 (a - d) shows the relationship between epochs and accuracy on four datasets, demonstrating the CAF-ODNN model’s 
generalizing and learning ability. We conducted experiments using varying numbers of epochs, as shown in Table 1 to determine the 
optimal value for the CAF-ODNN model. In Fig 8(a), we observe that CAF-ODNN performs significantly better after 30 epochs on 
GossipCO dataset. We plotted the training and validation accuracy against the number of epochs to visualize the learning curve and 
identify the optimal number of epochs in Fig 9 (a - d). In Fig 9(a), the validation accuracy reaches a plateau and starts to decline at 
around 9 epochs, while the training accuracy continues to increase. This phenomenon suggests that the model has already converged, 
but it may benefit from additional epochs. In Fig 8(b), the model achieves optimal performance and improved accuracy after 60 epochs 
for the PolitiFact dataset. Correspondingly, in Fig 9(b), the validation and training accuracy curves converge after approximately 10 
epochs, exhibiting a zigzag trend in both curves. This observation implies the model is still learning, and additional training may be 
required to reach a steady state. Similarly, Fig 8(c), shows improvement in CAF-ODNN performance after 20 epochs on Fakeddit. 
Fig. 8. (a - d) The graph consists of individual data points represented as dots connected by lines. Each dot represents a specific batch size and its 
corresponding accuracy score. The lines help visualize the trend in the data points, and the circular markers placed at each data point highlight the 
exact values of batch sizes and accuracy scores. 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
21
(caption on next page) 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
22
Correspondingly, in Fig 9(c), the validation and training accuracy curves converge at around 11 epochs, with validation accuracy 
plateauing. However, in Fig 8(d), the performance on Pheme’s dataset converges after 60 epochs. Correspondingly, in Fig 9(d), the 
validation accuracy converges after 9 epochs, and then plateaus. These observations suggest that each dataset has varying learning 
patterns and complexity. For example, initially, the model learns the underlying patterns in the GossipCO dataset, increasing its 
training and validation accuracy. The training accuracy increases as the model learns to fit the training samples. The behavior observed 
in both figures for the PolitiFact dataset suggests a complex learning pattern. It appears that the model requires several epochs to 
achieve optimal performance, indicating that the dataset could have intricate characteristics that necessitate a longer learning process 
for effective capture. A zigzag trend in the accuracy curves suggests that the optimization landscape of this dataset is not smooth and 
may have multiple local optima. The model navigates these optima during training, resulting in training and validation accuracy 
fluctuations. The convergence of the curves after some epoch implies that the model has learned the essential patterns and reached a 
stable point where further training does not significantly improve performance. The behavior observed in the Fakeddit dataset in­
dicates that the model has learned within a relatively small epoch. The initial improvement in performance suggests that the model 
quickly captures the relevant patterns in the dataset and adjusts its parameters accordingly. For the Pheme dataset, a longer training 
process is required for the model to reach its optimal performance. The convergence after 60 epochs suggests that the dataset contains 
complex patterns that take more time to learn effectively. The plateauing of the validation accuracy indicates that the model has 
captured the essential information in the dataset, and further training will not yield substantial improvements. 
4.8. Qualitative analysis 
We provide some instances to illustrate the success and limitations of the proposed model. Specifically, we analyze the fusion aspect 
of the model. To achieve this goal, we randomly select two pieces of news (one fake and one real) from the PolitiFact test set and 
qualitatively evaluate the model’s decision regarding the categorization into their respective labels. Fig 10 (a) and 10 (b) display the 
results of the quantitative analysis. 
The model in Fig 10 (a) correctly classify real news into its respective class label. A closer analysis of the image and corresponding 
caption suggest that the successful generation of caption words “jetliner … a tarmac next … city” and post-text words “airborne … 
buildings” may have given the semantics and context complementing each sentence pairs; thus, the correct label prediction. In Fig 10 
(b), the caption words "A man in a suit and tie is looking at his cell phone” and the post text “Barack Obama and John Lewis emotional 
hug” also seems to have given the model the semantic and context to classify the news label. While looking at the image, we can 
observe two men hugging each other emotionally, and neither is looking at the cell phone. Therefore, the complementary attention 
fusion captures these subtle differences since it captures the dependencies and interactions between the two modes, and ensures 
semantically meaningful contexts are incorporated. 
Fig. 9. (a – d) Validation accuracy Vs epochs on GossipCO, PolitiFact, Fakeddit and Pheme datasets.  
Fig. 10a. Success of fusion. A large jetliner sitting on top of a tarmac next to a city Label: Real [{’score’: 0.8758249394330129}] Success:   CAF- 
ODNN /R. 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
23
4.9. Discussion 
Tables 3 and 4 and Fig 5 (a-d) and Fig 6 (a-d) demonstrates the generalizability of the proposed method on four fake news datasets. 
This observation highlights the effectiveness of complementary attention fusion technique, which utilizes attention, feature alignment 
and optimization to learn a shared representation, thus capturing fine-grained correlations and interactions between modalities. Thus, 
the model is able to eliminate irrelevant and noisy features encouraging semantically meaningful fusion. Additionally, multimodal 
methods outperform single-modality approaches (La et al., 2022). The reason could be that the intricate relationship between images 
and text in news pieces enhances classification performance when efficiently combined (Wang et al., 2022). A more comprehensive 
understanding of the news pieces is obtained when text and visual information are exploited in unison. Therefore, multimodal evi­
dence provides diverse perspectives that complement each other, resulting in superior performance. The advantage offered by the 
proposed method is its usefulness in multimodal learning tasks, where both image and text information are available. It is crucial to 
capture the relationships between these modalities in a shared space. The technique eliminates irrelevant and noisy features, 
addressing a common issue in multimodal datasets containing such information. By removing these features, the model can focus on 
the most relevant information, avoiding potential misinterpretation. For example, the proposed method improves accuracy on the 
GossipCO, PolitiFact, and Fakeddit datasets by 0.032 %, 0.056 %, and 0.096 % points, respectively (Tables 3 and 4). Furthermore, the 
CAF fusion mechanism enhances the model by selectively attending to informative features during the combination, alignment, and 
learning of sentence pairs (Fig 5a-d) (Kumari & Ekbal, 2021). We also attribute this performance to the proposed model’s effective 
extraction of deep features using deep neural network. Maximizing hyperparameter search via grid algorithm enhances the efficiency 
and accuracy of feature extraction process. Thus, the model captures relevant information from both modalities with efficiency, 
resulting in improved performance. Through systematic exploration of diverse hyperparameter combinations, the approach discovers 
the optimal configuration that maximizes performance, yielding more accurate and efficient results. 
4.10. Theoretical and practical implications 
Fake news has a detrimental impact that extends far and wide, posing a threat to the safety of individuals and the vitality of 
democratic societies. Hence, it is essential to identify and combat fake news to maintain the integrity of public discourse and foster an 
informed citizenry. The proposed approach offers a theoretical framework for effectively incorporating multimodal information in fake 
news detection systems. Image captions and text data enhances the model’s ability to capture broad and relevant information, 
improving the accuracy of the detection algorithm. An image captioning method is essential in fake news detection since it allows 
image features to be represented in a shared space, compatible with the text post. This approach enables the model to capture the most 
subtle yet salient visual features within a semantic space exhibiting a high correlation with textual features. The technique ultimately 
increases the model’s capability to detect fake news containing both text and image content. Moreover, multimodal datasets manifest 
numerous irrelevant or noisy features that do not contribute to the underlying relationships between image and text data (Jin et al., 
2022). Including these irrelevant or noisy features affects the model’s performance by introducing noise into the data. The proposed 
Fig. 10b. Success of fusion. A man in a suit and tie is looking at his cell phone Label: Fake [{‘score’: 0.04367451638718302}] Success:   CAF- 
ODNN /F. 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
24
technique overcomes this problem by employing complementary attention mechanisms that allows the algorithm to concentrate on 
relevant patterns selectively from both modalities. In addition, the multimodal fused features are aligned and normalized via channel 
statistics to enhance the fusion process. As a result, irrelevant and noisy features are minimized, preserving semantic meaningfulness. 
Furthermore, an optimized deep neural network with grid search offers a more effective means of refined feature extraction and 
parameter optimization enhancing the performance of deep learning models for multimodal data analysis. The optimal alignment of 
hyperparameters in the proposed approach significantly enhances the accuracy and efficiency of the model. 
We have demonstrated the practical implementation of a deep learning multimodal fake news detection framework in this study. A 
few studies (La et al., 2022), (Meel & Vishwakarma, 2021), (Qi et al., 2021) exist that utilize image captioning information, thus, this 
study provides a method to mitigate the spread and detection of fake news, particularly multimodal fake news, which has become a 
global concern. The presented approach can be useful to fact-checkers, organizations, and researchers in improving news authenticity. 
The advantage of the proposed method is that it can be seamlessly integrated as a plug- in existing single-modal methods and utilized 
by fact-checkers to enhance detection capabilities. 
5. Conclusion and future work 
In this study, we proposed a Complementary Attention Fusion with an Optimized Deep Neural Network (CAF-ODNN) for multi­
modal fake news detection. The approach utilized image captions to represent images in a shared semantic space with text to capture 
subtle relationships. A complementary attention method based on scaled dot product was applied to fuse captions and text bi- 
directionally to capture fine-grained cross-modal interactions between the two modalities. To streamline and make the fusion 
robust, a dedicated alignment and normalization technique was introduced to calibrate fused features based on channel statistics of 
each channel dimension. This technique enhanced semantic significance and cross-modal interaction, mitigating feature variations 
and noisy features. ODNN was also implemented for refined feature extraction and model optimization. The ODNN learned higher- 
level abstracted features progressively from caption and text captured in CAF through compositional learning using three fully con­
nected layers. A grid search was incorporated to optimize the hyperparameters systematically, and identify configurations maximizing 
feature extraction quality and overall accuracy. The proposed method outperformed comparable methods on standard metrics in four 
real-world datasets. 
The proposed model can be exploited to enhance single-modality models since it uses multimodal features to detect fake news. 
Single-modality models rely on a single feature type, such as text or image, which can limit detection effectiveness due to individual 
modality biases and limitations. In the future, we intend to develop a more robust approach for multimodal fusion that effectively 
integrates image captions with other modalities. Additionally, we will consider incorporating user engagement features into the 
detection system for improved effectiveness. This approach will enable identify patterns of misinformation and disinformation that 
would be challenging to detect using any single feature alone. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Alex Munyole Luvembe: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software. Weimin Li: Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – 
review & editing, Supervision. Shaohau Li: Visualization, Investigation. Fangfang Liu: Supervision. Xing Wu: Writing – review & 
editing. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2022YFC3302600). 
References 
Alharbi, R., Jeter, T. R., & B, M. T. T (2023). Detection of fake news through heterogeneous graph interactions (Eds.). In D. Mohaisen, & T. Wies (Eds.), NETYS 2023, 
LNCS 14067 (pp. 3–16). Springer Nature Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37765-5, 2023. (pp. 3–16). 
Al-Malla, M. A., Jafar, A., & Ghneim, N. (2022). Image captioning model using attention and object features to mimic human image understanding. Journal of Big Data, 
9(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-022-00571-w 
Al Obaid, A., Khotanlou, H., Mansoorizadeh, M., & Zabihzadeh, D (2022). Multimodal fake-news recognition using ensemble of deep learners. Entropy, 24(9), 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/e24091242 
Armin, K., Djordje, S., & Matthias, Z. (2021). Multimodal detection of information disorder from social media. In Proceedings of the international workshop on content- 
based multimedia indexing, 2021-june. https://doi.org/10.1109/CBMI50038.2021.9461898 
Bagade, A., Pale, A., Sheth, S., Agarwal, M., Chakrabarti, S., Chebrolu, K., & Sudarshan, S. (2020). The Kauwa-Kaate fake news detection system: DemO. In Proceedings 
of the ACM international conference proceeding series (pp. 302–306). https://doi.org/10.1145/3371158.3371402 
Cao, J., Qi, P., Sheng, Q., Yang, T., Guo, J., & Li, J. (2020). Exploring the role of visual content in fake news detection. In Disinformation, misinformation, and fake 
news in social media (pp. 141–161). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-42699-6_8. 
St. Cer, D., Yang, Y., Kong, S.yi, Hua, N., Limtiaco, N., John, R., Constant, N., Guajardo-C´espedes, M., Yuan, S., Tar, C., Sung, Y. H., Strope, B., & Kurzweil, R (2018). 
Universal sentence encoder for English. In Proceedings of the EMNLP 2018 - conference on empirical methods in natural language processing: system demonstrations, 
proceedings (pp. 169–174). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/d18-2029 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
25
Chen, X., Fang, H., Lin, T., Vedantam, R., Zitnick, C.L., Gupta, S., & Doll, P. (2015). Microsoft COCO Captions : Data Collection and Evaluation Server. 1–7. 
Choras, M., Gielczyk, A., Demestichas, Konstantinos Puchalski, D., & Kozik, R. (2018). Pattern Recognition Solutions for Fake News Detection. In K. Saeed and W. 
Homenda (Eds.): CISIM 2018, LNCS 11127, pp. 130–139, 2018. (Vol. 1, pp. 486–498). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99954-8. 
Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., Uszkoreit, J., & Houlsby, N. 
(2021). An Image is Worth 16 × 16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. ICLR 2021. http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929. 
Giachanou, A., Ghanem, B., Ríssola, E. A., Rosso, P., Crestani, F., & Oberski, D. (2022). The impact of psycholinguistic patterns in discriminating between fake news 
spreaders and fact checkers. Data and Knowledge Engineering, 138(March 2021), Article 101960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.datak.2021.101960 
Gong, S., Sinnott, R.O., Qi, J., & Paris, C. (2023). Fake News Detection Through Temporally Evolving User Interactions. In H. Kashima et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2023, lnai 
13938, pp. 137–148, 2023. (Vol. 1, pp. 137–148). Springer Nature Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-33383-5_11. 
Jarrahi, A., & Safari, L. (2023). Evaluating the effectiveness of publishers’ features in fake news detection on social media. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 82(2), 
2913–2939. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-12668-8 
Jin, Y., Wang, X., Yang, R., Sun, Y., Wang, W., Liao, H., & Xie, X. (2022). Towards fine-grained reasoning for fake news detection. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, 36(5), 5746–5754. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v36i5.20517 
Jin, Z., Cao, J., Guo, H., Zhang, Y., & Luo, J. (2017). Multimodal fusion with recurrent neural networks for rumor detection on microblogs. In MM 2017 - proceedings of 
the 2017 ACM multimedia conference (pp. 795–816). https://doi.org/10.1145/3123266.3123454 
Jing, Q., Yao, D., Fan, X., Wang, B., Tan, H., Bu, X., & Bi, J. (2021). TRANSFAKE: Multi-task transformer for multimodal enhanced fake news detection. In Proceedings 
of the international joint conference on neural networks (pp. 1–8). https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021.9533433, 2021-July. 
Khattar, D., Gupta, M., Goud, J.S., & Varma, V. (2019). MvaE: Multimodal variational autoencoder for fake news detection. The Web Conference 2019 - Proceedings 
of the World Wide Web Conference, WWW 2019, 7, 2915–2921. https://doi.org/10.1145/3308558.3313552. 
Kry´sci´nski, W., McCann, B., Xiong, C., & Socher, R. (2020). Evaluating the factual consistency of abstractive text summarization. In Proceedings of the EMNLP 2020 - 
2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, proceedings of the conference (pp. 9332–9346). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp- 
main.750 
Kumari, R., & Ekbal, A. (2021). AMFB: Attention based multimodal factorized bilinear pooling for multimodal fake news detection. Expert Systems with Applications, 
184(March), Article 115412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.115412 
La, T. V., Tran, Q. T., Tran, T. P., Tran, A. D., Dang-Nguyen, D. T., & Dao, M. S. (2022). Multimodal cheapfakes detection by utilizing image captioning for global 
context. In ICDAR 2022 - proceedings of the 3rd ACM workshop on intelligent cross-data analysis and retrieval (pp. 9–16). https://doi.org/10.1145/3512731.3534210 
Li, S., Weimin, L., Luvembe, A. M., & Weiqin, T. (2023a). Graph contrastive learning with feature augmentation for rumor detection. IEEE Transactions on 
Computational Social Systems, 590–605. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-26387-3_36 
Li, W., Guo, C., Liu, Y., Zhou, X., Jin, Q., & Xin, M. (2023b). Rumor source localization in social networks based on infection potential energy. Information Sciences, 634 
(March), 172–188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2023.03.098 
Li, W., Ni, L., Wang, J., & Wang, C. (2022a). Collaborative representation learning for nodes and relations via heterogeneous graph neural network. Knowledge-Based 
Systems, 255, Article 109673. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2022.109673 
Li, W., Wei, D., Zhou, X., Li, S., & Jin, Q. (2022b). F-SWIR: Rumor Fick-spreading model considering fusion information decay in social networks. Concurrency and 
Computation: Practice and Experience, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.7166. February. 
Ma, J., Gao, W., & Wong, K. (2019). Detect rumors on Twitter by promoting information campaigns with generative adversarial learning. In Proceedings of the 2019 
World Wide Web Conference (WWW’19). May 13–17, 2019, San Francisco, CA, USA,. 
Ma, J., Gao, W., & Wong, K. F. (2018). Rumor detection on twitter with tree-structured recursive neural networks. In , 1. Proceedings of the ACL 2018 - 56th annual 
meeting of the association for computational linguistics, proceedings of the conference (long papers) (pp. 1980–1989). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/p18-1184 
Madhusudhan, S., Mahurkar, S., & Nagarajan, S. K. (2020). Attributional analysis of multi-modal fake news detection models (grand challenge). In Proceedings of the 
2020 IEEE 6th international conference on multimedia big data, BigMM 2020 (pp. 451–455). https://doi.org/10.1109/BigMM50055.2020.00074 
Meel, P., & Vishwakarma, D. K. (2021). HAN, image captioning, and forensics ensemble multimodal fake news detection. Information Sciences, 567, 23–41. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ins.2021.03.037 
Mohtarami, M., Baly, R., Glass, J., Nakov, P., M`arquez, L., & Moschitti, A. (2018). Automatic stance detection using end-To-end memory networks. In , 1. Proceedings 
of the NAACL HLT 2018 - 2018 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies - proceedings of the 
conference (pp. 767–776). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n18-1070 
Munyole, A., Li, W., Li, S., Liu, F., & Xu, G. (2023). Dual emotion based fake news detection : A deep attention-weight update approach. Information Processing and 
Management, 60(4), Article 103354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2023.103354 
Nakamura, K., Levy, S., & Wang, W. Y. (2020). r/Fakeddit: A new multimodal benchmark dataset for fine-grained fake news detection. In Proceedings of the LREC 2020 
- 12th international conference on language resources and evaluation, conference proceedings (pp. 6149–6157). May. 
Nguyen, D. M., Do, T. H., Calderbank, R., Deligiannis, N., & Carolina, N. (2019). Fake news detection using deep Markov random fields. In Proceedings of the NAACL- 
HLT 2019 (pp. 1391–1400). 
Obaid, A. Al, Khotanlou, H., Mansoorizadeh, M., & Zabihzadeh, D (2023). Robust semi-supervised fake news recognition by effective augmentations and ensemble of 
diverse deep learners. IEEE access : practical innovations, open solutions, 11(May), 54526–54543. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3278323 
Olan, F., Jayawickrama, U., Arakpogun, E. O., Suklan, J., & Liu, S. (2022). Fake news on social media: The impact on society. Information Systems Frontiers. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10796-022-10242-z. January. 
Paschalides, D., Christodoulou, C., Orphanou, K., Andreou, R., Kornilakis, A., Pallis, G., Dikaiakos, M. D., & Markatos, E. (2021). Check-It: A plugin for detecting fake 
news on the web. Online Social Networks and Media, 25, 298–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.osnem.2021.100156 
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., & Grisel, O. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
12, 2825–2830. 
Qi, P., Cao, J., Li, X., Liu, H., Sheng, Q., Mi, X., He, Q., Lv, Y., Guo, C., & Yu, Y. (2021). Improving fake news detection by using an entity-enhanced framework to fuse 
diverse multimodal clues. In , 1. MM 2021 - proceedings of the 29th ACM international conference on multimedia (pp. 1212–1220). https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3474085.3481548 
Qi, P., Cao, J., Yang, T., Guo, J., & Li, J. (2019). Exploiting multi-domain visual information for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International 
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) Exploiting, ICDM (pp. 518–527). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDM.2019.00062 
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., & Sutskever, I. (2020). Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. OpenAI, San Francisco, Califor- 
Nia, United States. http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.07582. 
Sachan, T., Pinnaparaju, N., Gupta, M., & Varma, V. (2021). SCATE: Shared cross attention transformer encoders for multimodal fake news detection. In Proceedings of 
the 2021 IEEE/ACM international conference on advances in social networks analysis and mining, ASONAM 2021 (pp. 399–406). https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3487351.3490965 
Sengupta, E., Nagpal, R., Mehrotra, D., & Srivastava, G. (2021). ProBlock: A novel approach for fake news detection. Cluster Computing, 24(4), 3779–3795. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10586-021-03361-w 
Shu, K., Mahudeswaran, D., Wang, S., Lee, D., & Liu, H. (2020). FakeNewsNet: A data repository with news content, social context, and spatiotemporal information for 
studying fake news on social media. Big data, 8(3), 171–188. https://doi.org/10.1089/big.2020.0062 
Shu, K., Zhou, X., Wang, S., Zafarani, R., & Liu, H. (2019). The role of user profiles for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM international conference on 
advances in social networks analysis and mining (pp. 436–439). 
Singhal, S., Shah, R. R., Chakraborty, T., Kumaraguru, P., & Satoh, S. (2019). SpotFake: A multi-modal framework for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 2019 
IEEE fifth international conference on multimedia Big Data (BigMM). https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8919302. 
Song, C., Ning, N., Zhang, Y., & Wu, B. (2021). A multimodal fake news detection model based on crossmodal attention residual and multichannel convolutional 
neural networks. Information Processing and Management, 58(1), Article 102437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2020.102437 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


Information Processing and Management 61 (2024) 103653
26
Steinebach, M., Gotkowski, K., & Liu, H. (2019). Fake news detection by image montage recognition. In Proceedings of the ACM international conference proceeding 
series. https://doi.org/10.1145/3339252.3341487 
Wang, J., Mao, H., & Li, H. (2022). FMFN: Fine-Grained multimodal fusion networks for fake news detection. Applied Sciences (Switzerland), 12(3). https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/app12031093 
Wang, Y., Ma, F., Jin, Z., Yuan, Y., Xun, G., Jha, K., Su, L., & Gao, J. (2018). EANN: Event adversarial neural networks for multi-modal fake news detection. In 
Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 849–857). https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3219903 
Wang, Y., Ma, F., Wang, H., Jha, K., & Gao, J. (2021). Multimodal emergent fake news detection via meta neural process networks. In , 1. Proceedings of the ACM 
SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467153.  
Wu, L., Long, Y., Gao, C., Wang, Z., & Zhang, Y. (2023). MFIR : Multimodal fusion and inconsistency reasoning for explainable fake news detection. Information Fusion, 
100(July), Article 101944. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.101944 
Wu, P. Y., & Mebane, W. R. (2022). MARMOT A deep learning framework for constructing multimodal representations for vision-and-language tasks. Computational 
Communication Research, 4(1), 275–322. https://doi.org/10.5117/CCR2022.1.008.WU 
Xiong, S., Zhang, G., Batra, V., Xi, L., Shi, L., & Liu, L. (2023). TRIMOON: Two-Round inconsistency-based multi-modal fusion network for fake news detection. 
Information Fusion, 93(December 2022), 150–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2022.12.016 
Xue, J., Wang, Y., Tian, Y., Li, Y., Shi, L., & Wei, L. (2021). Detecting fake news by exploring the consistency of multimodal data. Information Processing and 
Management, 58(5), Article 102610. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2021.102610 
Yu, C., Ma, Y., An, L., & Li, G. (2022). BCMF: A bidirectional cross-modal fusion model for fake news detection. Information Processing and Management, 59(5). https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2022.103063 
Yu, F., Liu, Q., Wu, S., Wang, L., & Tan, T. (2017). A convolutional approach for misinformation identification. IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, 0, 3901–3907. https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2017/545 
Zhang, C., Li, W., Wei, D., Liu, Y., & Li, Z. (2022). Network dynamic GCN influence maximization algorithm with leader fake labeling mechanism. IEEE Transactions on 
Computational Social Systems, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2022.3193583 
Zhang, K., Zhang, H., Liu, Q., Zhao, H., Zhu, H., & Chen, E. (2019). Interactive attention transfer network for cross-domain sentiment classification. In Proceedings of 
the thirty-third AAAI conference on artificial intelligence (AAAI-19) interactive. 
Zhang, X., Dadkhah, S., Weismann, A. G., Kanaani, M. A., & Ghorbani, A. A. (2023). Multimodal fake news analysis based on image–text similarity. IEEE Transactions 
on Computational Social Systems, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2023.3244068. PP. 
Zhou, X., Wu, J., & Zafarani, R. (2020). SAFE: Similarity-Aware multi-modal fake news detection. In Proceedings of the lecture notes in computer science (including 
subseries lecture notes in artificial intelligence and lecture notes in bioinformatics), 12085 LNAI (pp. 354–367). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-47436-2_27 
Zubiaga, A., Liakata, M., & Procter, R. (2016). Learning Reporting Dynamics during Breaking News for Rumour Detection in Social Media. http://arxiv.org/abs/1610. 
07363. 
A.M. Luvembe et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                   


